DESIGNING
PERSONALIZED
LEARNING         EXPERIENCES

A FRAMEWORK FOR
HIGHER EDUCATION AND
WORKFORCE TRAINING

HELEN FAKE AND
NADA DABBAGH


Designing Personalized
Learning Experiences

Designing Personalized Learning Experiences offers theoretically grounded and
pragmatic approaches to designing personalized learning initiatives for higher
education and organizational contexts. With current research concluding that a
multitude of variables can enable learners to direct their own experiences and
achieve their goals, new guidance is needed to hone the range of instructional
approaches, activities, and interactions available to support adult learners. This
book offers practical strategies on how to design and implement effective
personalized learning interventions, advance learning and engagement,
encourage ownership over the learning process, and decrease attrition.

Professionals  in  instructional  design,  learning  and  development,
organizational development, consultancies, and beyond will be emboldened
by the work to leverage a mix of technology-enabled social and content
interactions.

Dr. Helen Fake is a Lead User Experience Researcher at The Motley Fool
and serves as an Adjunct Professor in the Division of Learning Technologies
at George Mason University, USA.

Dr. Nada Dabbagh is Professor and Director of the Division of Learning
Technologies in the College of Education and Human Development at
George Mason University, USA.



Designing Personalized
Learning Experiences

A Framework for Higher Education and
Workforce Training

HELEN FAKE AND NADA DABBAGH


Designed cover image: © Shutterstock

First published 2024
by Routledge

605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158

and by Routledge

4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN

Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business

© 2024 Helen Fake and Nada Dabbagh

The right of Helen Fake and Nada Dabbagh to be identified as authors of this
work has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publishers.

Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation
without intent to infringe.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Names: Fake, Helen, author. | Dabbagh, Nada, author.

Title: Designing personalized learning experiences : a framework for higher
education and workforce training / Helen Fake and Nada Dabbagh.

Description: New York, NY : Routledge, 2023. |
Includes bibliographical references and index.

Identifiers: LCCN 2022061938 (print) |

LCCN 2022061939 (ebook) | ISBN 9780367638566 (hardback) |
ISBN 9780367631864 (paperback) | ISBN 9781003121008 (ebook)

Subjects: LCSH: Individualized instruction. | Instructional systems–Design. |
Experiential learning. | Education, Higher. | Vocational education.

Classification: LCC LB1031 .F35 2023 (print) |

LCC LB1031 (ebook) | DDC 371.39/4–dc23/eng/20230221
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022061938

LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022061939

ISBN: 978-0-367-63856-6 (hbk)

ISBN: 978-0-367-63186-4 (pbk)

ISBN: 978-1-003-12100-8 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003121008

Typeset in Garamond

by MPS Limited, Dehradun


Contents

Preface                                vi

1 The History of Personalized Learning               1

2 Approaches to Personalized Learning              17

3 Designing Personalized Learning Experiences Using the

PL Interaction Framework (PLiF)                 44

4 Designing for Learner–Content Interaction           60

5 Designing for Learner–Learner Interaction           87

6 Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction        106

7 Designing for Learner–Mentor, Coach, or AI Interaction    128

8 Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction      145

9 Evaluating Personalized Learning Designs           169

10 Empowering Learners to Engage in Personalized Learning
Experiences                         186

Index                                209


Preface

What you will find in the reading of this book is a multi-level interaction
framework of personalized learning. We will explore how expert research has
suggested that by building upon Moore’s Interaction Framework, we may be
able to support lifelong learners in cultivating and creating selfsustaining
ecosystems of learning that leverage Web 2.0 and even Web 3.0 learning
technologies (Fake & Dabbagh, 2018, 2020). We will delve into the history,
research, best practices, and expressions of personalized learning. And we will
provide a framework that you can implement within your organization to
support your learners in developing personalized learning strategies that
encourage and scaffold lifelong learning practices. We hope that the
implementation of this framework will not only measurably impact the
lives    of the individuals that adopt these interactions, new behaviors, and life
skills, but also positively transform the organizations they seek to serve.

Why is this important? Well, it comes down to the need to support the
reskilling and retooling of a global workforce that’s facing unprecedented levels
of change (Donovan & Benko, 2016; Pelster et al., 2017; Thomas & Brown,
2011). According to Deloitte’s 2020 Global Human Capital Trends Survey,
53% of respondents indicated that more than half or all of their workforce
would need to change their skills and capabilities and skills in the next three
years (Schwartz et al., 2020). This is echoed in the World Economic Forum’s
“Future of Jobs 2020 Report” with COVID-19 only enhancing the need for a
workforce that can adapt to constantly changing conditions (Schwab &
Zahidi, 2020). The Future of Jobs also projects that 40–50% of currently
needed skillsets will change over the next 5 years. These studies espouse that
Workforce Training and Development Programs have a critical role for
individuals and organizations to maintain a competitive edge in the modern
age (Donovan & Benko, 2016; Pelster et al., 2017; Thomas & Brown, 2011).


Preface vii

The ethos of continuous development continues to be an important
initiative when according to Thompson et al. (2018), the challenge ranked
the second most difficult by training and development professionals surveyed
(N = 500) was “getting employees to make time for their personal training
and development”. Given that US Corporate Training budgets hovered
around $82.5 Billion in 2020, the market need and demand for training begs
questions of why employees are not engaging with current Workforce
Training and Development Programs.

This book offers practical guidance and strategies on how to design and
implement effective personalized learning interventions, advance learning,
increase engagement, decrease attrition, encourage ownership over the
learning process, develop employees, and retain talent within workforce
environments. Specifically, this book provides a personalized learning
interaction framework that could be leveraged for a range of use cases.

References

Donovan, J., & Benko, C. (2016). AT&T’s talent overhaul. Harvard Business Review,
68–73. Retrieved from https://hbr.org/2016/10/atts-talent -overhaul.

Fake, H. (2018). A delphi study on the dimensions of personalized learning in workforce
training and development programs. [Doctoral dissertation, CRC Press]. Proquest.

Fake, H., & Dabbagh, N. (2020). Personalized learning within online workforce learning
environments: Exploring implementations, obstacles, opportunities, and perspectives
of workforce leaders. Technology, Knowledge, and Learning, 25(1), 789–809. DOI:
10.1007/s10758-020 -09441-x.

Pelster, B., Johnson, D., Stempel, J., van der Vyver, B. (2017, February). Careers and
learning: Real time, all the time [Research Report]. Retrieved from Deloitte Insights:
https://www2.deloitte.com/insights/us/en/focus/human-capital-trends/2017/learning-
in-the-digital-age.html?id=us:2el:3dc:dup3818:awa:cons:hct17#endnote-4.

Schwartz, J., Denny, B., Mallon, D., Durme, V. D., Hauptmann, M., Yan, R., &
Poynton, S. (2020, May 15). Beyond reskilling: Investing in resilience for uncertain
futures. Deloitte Insights. https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/focus/human-
capital-trends/2020/reskilling-the-workforce-to-be-resili ent.html.

Schwab, K., & Zahidi, S. (2020). Global competitiveness report: Special edition 2020.

World Economic Forum.

Thomas, D., & Brown, J. S. (2011). A new culture of learning: Cultivating the imagi-
nation for a world of constant change. Lexington, KY: CreateSpace?.

Thompson, L., Pate, D., Schnidman, A., Lu, L., Andreatta, B., & Dewett, T. (2018).
2017 workplace learning report: How modern L&D pros are tackling topchallenges.
Retrieved from https://learning.linkedin.com/resources/workplace-learning-report-
2018?trk=lilblog_02-07-17_WLR-announcement_tl&cid=70132000001AyziAAC



The History of         1

Personalized Learning

Personalized learning is not new. In fact, one might argue that historically,
personalized learning has roots that reach back to the time of Aristotle. In the
interest of brevity and despite the inherent appeal of understanding per-
sonalized learning’s ancient Grecian origins, we will begin our exploration of
personalized learning in the 1900s.

The history of personalized learning has taken many forms and ap-
proaches. From learner-centered teaching strategies to machines, personal-
ized learning has taken many perspectives over the years. In fact, previous
research suggests a multitude of variables that could be used to personalize
the learning experience including (a) who should conduct personalized
learning, (b) what can be personalized, (c) where it can be personalized, and

(d) how personalization should occur.

To explore the history, we describe two approaches to personalized
learning in the following paragraphs: learner-centered teaching approaches
and the efforts of teaching machines.

Personalized Learning Through Learner-Centered
Teaching Strategies

We begin the exploration of learner-centered teaching strategies with John
Dewey’s paper titled “Democracy and Education” (Dewey, 1916; Watters,
2017). In this paper, Dewey advocated for an approach to education that
placed the student in the center of the instruction and emphasized indi-
vidualized learning experiences.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003121008-1


2 The History of Personalized Learning

Dewey’s ideologies and approach to education were embraced and ex-
perimented with by Helen Parkhurst in the early 1900s. As an educational
researcher and a contemporary of both Montessori and Dewey, Parkhurst
developed the Dalton Plan which started as a field experiment in Dalton,
Massachusetts. Parkhurst was a proponent that students should be given
ownership and support over their learning process (Lager, 1983). According
to the Dalton Plan, each student’s learning program should be personalized
and adapted to every individual, as well as their needs and interests. As
Dewey (1922) states, “The very set-up of the school program enlists the
cooperation of the children. By giving them real jobs, their wills become an
active force in the learning process” (p. 2).

To support student learning, the Dalton Plan relied on a variety of inter-
actions within defined structural pillars to personalize the learner’s experience
(e.g., the homeroom, the assignment, and the lab). More specifically, the
Dalton Plan included four of the five interactions offered by the Personalized
Learning Interaction Framework: the learner-mentor, learner-learner, learner-
content, and learner-small group as described in Chapter 3). As mentioned
before, the homeroom, the assignment, and the lab offer structured pillars of
the Dalton Plan. We present the alignment of these structures, the interactions
they enabled, and the purpose of each pillar in the table below (Table 1.1).

Table 1.1 Interactions Enabled by the Structural Pillars of the Dalton Plan


Dalton Plan
Structural Pillar

Purpose of Structural Pillar   Interaction Enabled

by Structural Pillar


Home Room   Supported the socio-cultural

interaction between teachers
and parents. Examined
potential to extend the
learner-mentor relationship
beyond  the classroom.

Assignment    Described as where the learner

defined learning goals based
on goals and interests
according to a short and long
timeframe negotiated with a
mentor.

Lab      Examined as a place where
students could work with other
learners to build upon and
provide feedback about their
learning.

Learner-Mentor/
Parent

Learner-Mentor
Learner-Content

Learner-Learner
Learner-Small
Group


The History of Personalized Learning 3

As you can see in the table above, the house or homeroom supported the
socio-cultural interaction between teachers and parents. Next, the assignment
served as a negotiation between the learner-mentor where the learner defined
their interests and learning goals while collaborating with the mentor to set
short-term and long-term timelines. Finally, the Lab, or one-on-one and
small group sessions, provided opportunities to field feedback from other
learners or a small group about what is being learned throughout the as-
signments (The Dalton School, 2016).

The program’s popularity grew and eventually expanded the Dalton
schools to an audience of learners worldwide. Dalton Schools could be found
in Australia, Germany, the Netherlands, the Soviet Union, India, China, and
Japan (van der Ploeg, 2013). In 1923 there were thousands of Dalton
Schools in England and between 100 and 200 in the United States (van der
Ploeg, 2013). Currently, there are still over 40 Dalton Schools interna-
tionally (Dalton International, 2016).

The decline of Dalton Schools may be associated with the loss of Helen
Parkhurst in 1973, but many critics of the program cite difficulties with the
sustainability of the Dalton Plan’s resource-intensive structure. Other
detractors uphold that the Plan’s approach to personalization was unrealistic
and unscalable (Lynch, 2014). Despite the success and impact of the Dalton
Plan’s approach to learning, Parkhurst’s understated legacy and influence is
explored by Lager (1983) in her dissertation.

Personalized Learning with The First “Intelligent
Machines”

To address issues of scalability, researchers began to explore how machines or
educational technologies might support personalized learning. According to
Benjamin (1988), the first documented effort to build an “intelligent
machine” can be traced to Sidney L. Pressey in the early 1920s. Pressey’s
wooden apparatus allowed students to receive immediate feedback on the
answers to a set of multiple-choice questions. A further description of the
machine reveals both a “teaching mode” and “learning mode” setting that
would change the behavior of the machine (Benjamin, 1988). In the
“teaching mode” setting, students would not advance to the next question
until they answered a multiple-choice question correctly. In the “learning
mode”, students‘ answers would advance regardless of their accuracy and the
final score would be calculated and reported back to the student at the
conclusion of the session. Thus, students were encouraged to experiment and


4 The History of Personalized Learning

find answers through the “teaching mode”, where they were able to get
answers through a course of trial and error. Afterward, they could check their
knowledge in the “learning mode”. As the development of the tool evolved,
the design awarded candy to students who achieved minimum scores
(Benjamin, 1988; Shute & Psotka, 1994).

While Pressey was the first known to develop intelligent machines, Skinner
is better known for his experiments in this domain. Frustrated by the pacing of
his fourth-grade daughter’s math class, Skinner conceived of ways to indi-
vidualize instruction to better accommodate student needs. Two complaints of
the current method of instruction were that students were instructed at the
same pace regardless of their knowledge and understanding and that there was
a lag time between individual performance and feedback on class assignments.
To address these problems, Skinner developed a “teaching machine” grounded
in his theories of behaviorism and designed to instruct learners by introducing
new material in small steps (Bates, 2014; Benjamin, 1988; Skinner, 1983).
This allowed students to complete exercises at their own pace and advance to
updated content once key concepts had met minimum requirements. In doing
so, the machine was able to provide immediate feedback and allow the learner
to advance at their own pace based on their performance.

Both Pressey’s and Skinner’s instructional systems allowed for a person-
alized learning experience by providing immediate and individualized per-
formance feedback while facilitating opportunities for advancement based on
the learner’s performance. Meeting the minimum criteria would allow a
high-performing student the opportunity to advance to more difficult
questions and exercises. For those who did not meet the minimum criteria,
the teaching machines were adapted to provide increased practice opportu-
nities. Ultimately Pressey and Skinner’s machines were replaced by
electronic-based teaching systems, which overcame many of the mechanical
constraints of their designs which provided more flexibility.

While there were major advantages to scaling by leveraging these tools,
there were also limitations. For example, machines were excellent resources
when the rules for what is “right” and “wrong” are well defined. Certain
domains, such as math or science, tend to be well-suited to teaching
machines. The advantages of “teaching machines”, or adaptive path systems,
may be best leveraged when the learning task is well structured (e.g., when
there are rules that constitute right and wrong answers). The development of
teaching machines continues with the innovation of electric-based systems
which we explore in the paragraph below.

The PLATO Project. The scalability of learning machines continued its
trajectory throughout the 1960s to the 1980s reflecting and expanding the


The History of Personalized Learning 5

possibilities of “intelligent machines” as they evolved from mechanical ap-
paratuses to electrical systems. This transition facilitated increased oppor-
tunities for learning outside the classroom since no instructor was needed to
operate the machine or maintain the machine parts. PLATO, or the
Programmed Logic for Automatic Teaching Operations, is often cited as the
first generalized Computer Assisted Instruction (CAI) system. It was initially
developed by a team headed by engineering professor and physicist Bitzer at
the University of Illinois, who conceived of the project upon learning that
50% of all high school graduates were functionally illiterate (Encyclopædia
Britannica, 2016; Seattler, 1990).

Personalized learning was described as characteristic of the PLATO sys-
tem’s content offerings. As detailed in the PLATO User’s Guide, individu-
alized instruction (e.g., frequent testing, frequent feedback, detailed
feedback, alternative learning paths, mastery learning, and objective-based
instruction) is the most common feature in the PLATO system because its
presentation capabilities are broad enough to support these demanding
instructional methods (Control Data Corporation, 1981).

The PLATO project lost steam due to costs, inability to scale, a backlash
against “kill and drill instructional strategies”, and technological affordances
provided by more flexible micro and personal computers. While the project
eventually lost support, it is important to note that many advances were
made in the PLATO project that facilitated the development and refinement
of many of the information communications technologies we embrace today,
including modern-day computers, chat rooms, community boards, online
testing, multiplayer games, and more (Hart, 1995; Woolley, 1994).

A Continuum of Personalized Learning

As noted, so far, these two approaches to personalized learning (i.e., learner-
centered, or machine-enabled) represent a dichotomy of thinking sur-
rounding personalized learning which Gallagher and Prestwich (2013) rep-
resent in Figure 1.1.

The figure demonstrates that personalized learning ranges on a continuum
from adaptivity to autonomy that can be described, framed, and designed
using several dimensions (Gallagher & Prestwich, 2013). Here we see per-
sonalized learning as a broad construct. On one extreme end (Macro), PL
encourages a learner’s complete agency and ownership over the learning
process. At the other end (Micro), a machine or system makes the decision
for the learner based on its evaluation of the learners’ aptitudes or


6 The History of Personalized Learning

Figure 1.1 Continuum of Personalized Learning.

performance. Within the continuum, you can see there is a mix of machine-
led and learner-led PL approaches.

Gallagher and Prestwich (2013) encourage organizations to go beyond the
method or technology used to personalize learning and to consider the dif-
ferent approaches from a pedagogical perspective to help define which
learning technologies to use and when. For instance, Gallagher and
Prestwich (2013) argue that adaptive path and systems-based approaches are
optimal when the learning objectives are outcome-based or observationally
driven. The types of personalized learning approaches are best leveraged
when the aims of the learning are behaviorist or objectivist and the “rules” of
a domain are clear (e.g., grammar, elementary school mathematics, learning
the contemporary and defined laws of physics). In this approach, there are
right and wrong answers that can be defined by the system and are most
suited for learning outcomes associated with remembering and under-
standing.

Not all learning tasks, however, have clear “rules”. It may also take time
and resources to program and set up “rules” within systems-based imple-
mentation in emerging and constantly changing operational environments.
When it comes to establishing clear “rules” for systems-based implementa-
tions, they may be difficult, if not impossible, to define. For example, while


The History of Personalized Learning 7

there may be clear insights into how best to collaborate with others, it is
harder to define an instance wherein someone’s actions are “right” or
“wrong”. Here, adaptive path technologies or systems-based approaches may
be less effective in accounting for the contextual and cultural dimensions of
the learning task at hand. Hence, learner-based personalization may be better
suited to such situations.

Of course, this exploration discusses the extremes of purely systems-based
and purely learner-based personalization. Each approach has its own ad-
vantages and disadvantages. On the one hand, system-based PL can scale and
is easily measured based on successful adherence to the defined performance
metrics. The disadvantage is that developing these tools may be time-
consuming and resource intensive to code. On the other hand, learner-based
personalization empowers the learner to take ownership over their learning
process, allows for flexible learning based on constantly changing operational
environments, and can respond to ill-structured problem spaces without the
need   of defining and coding for constantly changing parameters. The dis-
advantage to this approach, however, is that it requires high levels of
motivation, and the success of learner-driven initiatives may be harder to
measure or define.

What is important to note is that neither approach to personalized
learning is fundamentally right nor wrong. The best answer toward how to
design a personalized learning experience likely requires a mix of strategies
that take into consideration learning theory, learning models, instructional
strategies, learning tasks, learning outcomes, learner maturity, and tech-
nology, and to ensure that these factors are pedagogically aligned. As learning
leaders, leveraging these dimensions enables us to develop personalized
learning approaches from a strategic rather than tactical position.

Next, we will explore the theory of affordances and its implications on
technology and the design of personalized learning.

The Role or Influence of Technology in
Personalized Learning

To understand the role of technology in personalized learning, we explore the
concept of affordances and its implications on the evolution of technology-
based learning environments from a pedagogical perspective (Dabbagh, 2004;
Dabbagh & Reo, 2011). Gibson’s theory of affordances is an ecological
approach to psychology that emphasizes perception and action rather
than memory and retrieval. Gibson (1979) proposed that objects and artifacts


8 The History of Personalized Learning

(e.g., technologies) have certain affordances or possibilities for action that lead
organisms (e.g., people) to act based on their perceptions of these affordances.
In other words, action and perception are linked through the affordances
present in each situation and the abilities of an agent to act upon these af-
fordances. This leads to the construct of pedagogical ecology that emphasizes
the non-neutrality of the learning space and characterizes the linkage between
pedagogy and technology and consideration of the expectations and interac-
tion potentials that each learning medium brings forth to the teaching and
learning process (Dabbagh & Reo, 2011; Jaffee, 2003). Supporters of this view
(e.g., Frielick, 2004; Kozma, 1994) argue that each learning medium, setting,
or context, has a unique set of characteristics and that understanding the
pedagogical affordances of these characteristics is essential to understanding
their ecological influence on teaching and learning.

For example, pre-Internet technologies such as broadcast technologies that
focus on transmitting information or one-way provision of content (e.g., PPT
presentations, video lectures, film, TV) “afford” pedagogical practices that are
primarily behaviorist or objectivist in nature. These include direct instruction,
individualized learning, self-contained curricular units, and drill and practice
activities resulting in predetermined technology-based instructional systems or
adaptive systems such as programmed instruction (PI) and computer-assisted
or computer-based instruction (CAI/CBI) (see Figure 1.2). Learning interac-
tions supported with pre-Internet technologies were confined to learner-
instructor and learner-content interactions. Types of interactions are defined in
Chapter 3.

Figure 1.2 Pre-Internet Technologies.


The History of Personalized Learning 9

As the technology evolved from static and unidirectional to dynamic and
participatory with the onset of Information Communication Technologies
(ICT), the Internet, and the World Wide Web, or what has come to be known
as Web 1.0 technologies, learning interactions and teaching practices also
evolved enabling open and flexible learning spaces and affording multiple
forms of interaction. Such interactions included learner-learner, learner-group,
learner-content, learner-instructor, and group-group allowing teaching and
learning to be distributed across time and place synchronously or asynchro-
nously (Dabbagh & Bannan-Ritland, 2005). These technology-based learning
interactions led to instructional strategies that are constructivist in nature, such
as collaboration, articulation, social negotiation, exploration, and reflection to
name a few (see Figure 1.3).

Technology evolved again in the 21st century leading to a new wave of ICT
known as Web 2.0 technology. Web 2.0 technology possessed many of the
inherent technological and pedagogical affordances of older computer-
mediated communication tools but also represented a qualitative shift in how
information is created, delivered, and accessed on the Web (Dabbagh & Reo,
2011). Web 2.0 became a concept that embodied themes such as openness,
personalization, customization, participation, social networking, social pres-
ence, user-generated content, the people’s Web, read/write Web, and collective
wisdom leading to its characterization as the “Social Web” (Alexander, 2006;
Davis, 2008; Jones, 2008; O’Reilly, 2005). The social side of Web 2.0 and its
implications on the education sector was emphasized in the 2014 NMC (New
Media Consortium) Horizon Report (Johnson et al., 2014) particularly as this

Figure 1.3 Web 1.0 Technologies.


10 The History of Personalized Learning

Figure 1.4 Web 2.0 Technologies.

relates to social media use and how this is changing the way students and
educators interact, present information, and judge the quality of content and
contributions. For example, blogging, microblogging (tweeting), podcasting,
social bookmarking, social tagging, and social networking became the new
affordances of Web 2.0 technologies and as a result, new teaching approaches,
theories, and constructs evolved such as connectivism (Siemens, 2005), net-
worked learning, MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses), mobile learning,
augmented reality (AR) experiences, and Personal Learning Environments
(PLEs) (Figure 1.4).

Unlike Web 1.0 technology where use was limited to only 14% of the
adult population, most of which were programmers and tech-savvy in-
dividuals (Aggarwal, 2014), Web 2.0 technology use grew to 90% of the

U.S. population and 65% worldwide (Hootsuite, 2021) because of its read/
write affordances. The new activities that grew out of Web 2.0 technologies
(e.g., blogging, wikis, creating and posting videos) moved web-based learning
activities away from having to be teacher-centered to the possibility of being
more learner-centered. First, Web 2.0 technologies made it possible for
learners to engage in high levels of dialogue, interaction, collaboration, and
social negotiation through social networks and provided learners with the
ability to generate and share knowledge across learning networks. Second,
Web 2.0 technologies deflected control of learning away from a single
instructor or expert by distributing learning among all participants in the
learning community, promoting agency in the learning process and


The History of Personalized Learning 11

enhancing an appreciation of diversity, multiple perspectives, and epistemic
issues. And third, Web 2.0 technologies enabled learners to personalize their
learning environment by selecting the technologies they wish to use (e.g.,
apps on mobile devices), accessing and organizing information sources,
customizing the user interface of technology, and building personalized
learning and professional networks (Dabbagh et al., 2019).

The approachability and promise of Web 2.0 platforms did not escape the
notice of the educational community. The interactions and increased com-
munications enabled by Web 2.0 technologies prompted leaders like David
Miliband, England’s Minister of State for School Standards, to call for
increased personalized learning experiences within England’s school systems
(Miliband, 2006). In his speech, he expressed his support of personalized
learning technologies as expanding the influence of the teacher. New edu-
cational technologies, accountability frameworks, and streamlined and sim-
plified internal processes could support “what the most successful teachers do
best … (which was) create an education system with personalized learning at
its heart” (p. 2). Despite the promise of these tools, Miliband also
acknowledged how relying too heavily on the “silver bullet” of technology
could result in poor student outcomes. In this, he promoted the synchro-
nicity of technology, teacher, and social support to effectively integrate
personalized learning into England’s school systems.

The role of Web 3.0 technologies in personalized learning is also evolving
and merits its own course of study. Web 3.0 technology is the next iteration
of the World Wide Web and is sometimes referred to as the “semantic”,
“spatial”, or “3D web” (Evans, 2021; Roy, 2022). As Evans describes, rather
than seeking information by keyword, activities, or interests, users will be
able to define their preferred means of information seeking. Enabled by
blockchain technologies, the Web 3.0 movement has been characterized by
embracing the principles of “open, decentralized, censorship-resistant,
immutable, trustless, and permissionless” interactions (Eshita, 2021).
These platforms cut out the middleman of the larger corporations so that the
user can control their own data analytics, set their own rules, and obtain the
full monetary gain from their efforts online. For example, a user getting a cut
of profits from their offerings on Medium.com may be able to leverage Web

3.0 technologies to gain the full profit using blockchain technologies like
Mirror.

Web 3.0 also promises interoperability so that end users do not need to
create multiple accounts for multiple services. Web 3.0 also promises users
voting rights that regulate the governance of overarching communities’ roles
as opposed to relying on the dictates of bigger platforms like Twitter,


12 The History of Personalized Learning

Figure 1.5 Affordances for Web 1.0, Web 2.0, and Web 3.

Google, or Meta. Given the promised interoperability, Web 3.0 may enable
personalization across platforms, yielding a cryptographically-backed digital
identity to be represented across the web and resources that connect better to
the end users based on their interests and powered by machine learning
(Evans, 2021). These extended capabilities, however, are in their nascent
stages and beg questions about privacy, security, bias, and censorship.
Figure 1.5 demonstrates the fundamental affordances of Web 1.0, Web 2.0,
and Web 3.0 technologies which result in different implementations of PL.
As can be seen from the discussion above, there is a reciprocal, recursive, and
transformative interplay between technology and pedagogy. The co-evolution of
technology and pedagogy suggests that technology can no longer be perceived as
a tool that may or may not be used for teaching and learning. Rather, technology
is an enabler of virtually every teaching model or strategy and an empowering
agent for its users. Patterns of technology use across the decades have shaped our
teaching and learning experiences, and consequently, our learning theories,
models, and strategies. As technology continues to evolve, pedagogical processes
and practices will also continue to evolve. This is where “the relativistic nature” of
the ecological view comes into play. A mutuality exists between our tools and our
intentions, and while our tools are the product of our intentions, they also shape
our intentions in turn (Beston, 1948 in Popova, 2015). Fawns (2022) refers to
the relationship between technology and pedagogy as “entangled pedagogy” or
an “entangled relationship” where (a) purpose, context, and values act as drivers
of method and technology; (b) technology is perceived as part of entangled
pedagogy; (c) agency or control is negotiated between elements (teacher, tech,
students, policy, infrastructure, etc.); (d) outcomes are contingent on complex

relations; and (e) skill equals relational design and orchestration.

While there is a symbiotic set of interrelationships at play with “the rel-
ativistic nature“ of technological affordances, experts continue to battle the
prevailing tendency to limit conceptions of the ‘social’ to interactions
between persons rather than between persons and things (Malafouris &
Renfrew, 2010). Gibson’s theory of affordances is one of those attempts. The


The History of Personalized Learning 13

theory of affordances has direct implications on how we may understand the
evolution or ecology of personalized learning and the technology-based
design of learning activities and interactions. For example, pre-Internet
technologies played a major role in ushering adaptive learning systems that
personalized learning based on the learner’s performance outcomes. Web 1.0
technologies enabled flexible learning spaces that allowed learners to learn at
their own pace formally and informally and increased the level of interactions
from learner-instructor and learner-content to learner-group and group-
group interactions. Web 2.0 technologies allowed learners to generate their
own content, select the technologies they wish to use for learning, and build
personalized learning and professional networks prompting more learner
control and agency in the learning process. Web 3.0 technologies are en-
abling even more learner control and agency through access to personal data
analytics and interoperability.

The Importance of Lifelong Learning and the Role
of Learner Agency

As our technologies evolve, the pace of change continues to accelerate. The
rapidity of change requires workers to be constantly reskilling and retooling
their skillset to adapt in the face of operational, social, contextual, and
ecological changes (Donovan and Benko, 2016; Pelster, 2016; Thomas and
Brown, 2011). Given this dynamic and the constant pivoting of the oper-
ational environment, it becomes increasingly important for an organization’s
future success to develop programs that support workers in cultivating life-
long learning skills.

Learning leaders understand the strategic importance of training in
sharpening their company’s competitive edge, decreasing employee attrition,
attracting, and retaining top talent, increasing productivity, and addressing
the pace of change inherent in a globalizing world where technological
disruptions accelerate transformational changes. Competitive organizations
share the perspective that continually investing in skill-building, expanding
competencies and skillsets, cultivating awareness about changing operational
environments, facilitating, and empowering learning relationships, and
refining project and people management skills will be key to survival for
organizations in the modern age (Donovan & Benko, 2016; LinkedIn
Learning, 2021). Attracting top talent may also be won or lost based on a
company’s dedication to training and development opportunities (LinkedIn
Learning, 2021). The key to survival and success for individuals in this


14 The History of Personalized Learning

environment is contextual awareness, flexibility, and continuous learning
(Knowland & Thomas, 2014). As Alvin Toffler, author and futurist said,
“The illiterate of the 21st century will not be those who cannot read and
write, but those who cannot learn, unlearn, and relearn”.

The challenges of being in a continuous learning mode require empow-
ering the learner to develop agency in lifelong learning. Personalizing
learning and the framework described in this book, the Personalized
Learning Interaction Framework, is an effective and sustainable solution to
addressing this challenge. With historical, theoretical, and pedagogical
foundations set, we will continue to explore Personalized Learning by
looking at what researchers have discovered in K-12, Higher Education, and
Workforce Training contexts.

References

Aggarwal, R. (2014, March). 25 years after its birth, the World Wide Web becomes
applified. Wired Magazine. Retrieved from http://www.wired.com/insights/2014/03/
25-years-birth-world-wide-web-becomes-appified/.

Alexander, B. (2006). Web 2.0: A New Wave of Innovation for Teaching and Learning?

EDUCAUSE Review, 41(2), 33–34.

Bates, T. (2014, December 10). A short history of technology [web log post], Retrieved
from http://www.tonybates.ca/2014/12/10/a-short-history-of-educational-technology/.
Benjamin, L. T. (1988). A history of teaching machines. American Psychologist, 43(9),

703–712. doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.43.9.703.

Control Data Corporation (1981). PLATO user’s guide [pdf document]. Retrieved from
http://www.mirrorservice.org/sites/www.bitsavers.org/pdf/cdc/plato/97405900C_
PLATO_Users_Guide_Apr81.pdf.

Dabbagh, N. (2004). Distance Learning: Emerging Pedagogical Issues and Learning
Designs. Quarterly Review of Distance Education, 5(1), 37–49.

Dabbagh, N., & Bannan-Ritland, B. (2005). Online Learning: Concepts, Strategies, and
Application. Pearson/Merrill/Prentice Hall.

Dabbagh, N., Marra, R. M., & Howland, J. L. (2019). Meaningful Online Learning:
Integrating Strategies, Activities, and Learning Technologies For Effective Designs.
Routledge.

Dabbagh, N., & Reo, R. (2011). Impact of Web 2.0 on higher education. In Technology
Integration in Higher Education: Social and Organizational Aspects (pp. 174–187). IGI
Global.

Davis, M. (2008). Semantic Wave 2008 Report: Industry Roadmap to Web 3.0 &
Multibillion Dollar Market Opportunities (Executive Summary). Washington DC:
Project  10X.  Retrieved  June  16th,  2008  from  http://www.eurolibnet.eu/files/
REPOSITORY/20090507165103_SemanticWaveReport2008.pdf.

Dewey, E. (1922). The Dalton Laboratory Plan. London: J.M. Dent & Sons.


The History of Personalized Learning 15

Dewey, J. (1916). Democracy and Education: An introduction to the philosophy of education.

New York, NY: Macmillan.

Donovan, J., & Benko, C. (2016). AT&T’s talent overhaul. Harvard Business Review,
68–73. Retrieved from https://hbr.org/2016/10/atts-talent-overhaul.

Eshita (2021, September 9). Web3: In a nutshell. Mirror. https://eshita.mirror.xyz/
H5bNIXATsWUv_QbbEz6lckYcgAa2rhXEPDRkecOlCOI.

Evans, B. (2021, December). Three steps to the future. Helsinki; Finland: Slush.

Fawns, T. (2022). An entangled pedagogy: Looking beyond the pedagogy – technology
dichotomy. Postdigital Science and Education. 10.1007/s42438-022-00302-7.

Frielick, S. (2004, December). Beyond constructivism: An ecological approach to e-
learning. In Proceedings of the 21st ASCILITE Conference (pp. 328–332).

Gallagher, P. S., & Prestwich, S. (2013). Developing a personalization strategy for online
learning environments. Unpublished manuscript.

Gibson, J. J. (1979). The theory of affordances. The ecological approach to visual per-
ception. The people, place and, space reader (pp. 56–60). New York, NY, USA:
Routledge.

Hart, R. S. (1995). The Illinois PLATO foreign languages project. CALICO Journal,
12(4), 15–37.

Hootsuite, W. A. S. (2021). Digital 2021: Global Overview Report. DataReportal–Global
Digital Insights.

Jaffee, D. (2003). Virtual transformation: Web-based technology and pedagogical change.

Teaching Sociology, 31(2), 227–236.

Johnson, L., Becker, S. A., Estrada, V., & Freeman, A. (2014). NMC horizon report: 2014
K (pp. 1–52). The New Media Consortium.

Jones, B. (2008). Web 2.0 Heroes: Interviews with 20 Web 2.0 Influencers. United
Kingdom: Wiley.

Knowland, V. C. P., & Thomas, S. C. (2014). Educating the adult brain: How the
neuroscience of learning can inform educational policy. International Review of
Education, 60(1), 99–122.

Kozma, R. B. (1994). Will media influence learning? reframing the debate. Educational
Technology Research and Development, 42(2), 7–19. 10.1007/bf02299087.

Lager, D. (1983). Helen Parkhurst and the Dalton Plan: The life and work of an American
educator (Doctoral Dissertation). Retrieved from http://digitalcommons.uconn.edu/
dissertations/AAI8317707 (AAI8317707).

LinkedIn Learning (2021). 2021 Workplace Learning Report. LinkedIn. https://learning.
linkedin.com/content/dam/me/business/en-us/amp/learning-solutions/images/wlr21/
pdf/LinkedIn-Learning_Workplace-Learning-Report-2021-EN-1.pdf.

Lynch, M. (2014). Personalized learning in K-12 schools: How did we make it happen?
Retrieved from http://www.huffingtonpost.com/matthew-lynch-edd/personalized-
learning-in_b_6315402.html.

Malafouris, L., & Renfrew, C. (2010). The cognitive life of things: Recasting the boundaries
of the mind. McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research.

Miliband, D. R. (2006). Choice and voice in personalized learning. In Schooling for
tomorrow. Personalising education (pp. 21–30). Paris: OECD.

O’Reilly, T. (2005, September 30). What is web 2.0. O‘Reilly. https://www.oreilly.com/
pub/a/web2/archive/what-is-web-20.html.


16 The History of Personalized Learning

Pelster, B., Haims, J., Stempel, J., & van der Vyver, B. (2016, February). Learning:
Employees take charge. Retrieved from Deloitte Insights: http://dupress.com/articles/
fostering-culture-of-learning-for-employees/?id=us:2el:3dc:dup3026:awa:cons:hct16.

PLATO. (2016). In Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved from https://www.britannica.
com/topic/PLATO-education-system.

Popova, M. (2015, November 16). Henry Beston’s beautiful 1948 manifesto for re-
claiming our humanity by breaking the tyranny of technology and relearning to be
nurtured by nature . The Marginalian. https://www.themarginalian.org/2015/11/16/

henry‐beston‐northern‐farm/.

Roy, N. A. (2022). The Seasonal Tokens Podcast - Crypto Investing, Not Gambling. The

Seasonal Tokens Podcast with Polar. other.

Seattler, P. (1990). The evolution of American educational technology. Eaglewood, CO:
Libraries Unlimited, Inc.

Shute, V. J., & Psotka, J. (1994). Intelligent tutoring systems: Past, present, and future.
In D. Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of research for educational communications and tech-
nology (pp. 570–600). New York, NY: Macmillan. 10.21236/ADA280011.

Siemens, G. (2005). Connectivism: A learning theory for the digital age. International
Journal of Instructional Technology and Distance Learning, 2(1). Available from http://
www.itdl.org/Journal/Jan_05/article01.htm.

Skinner, B. F. (1983) A matter of consequences: Part three of an autobiography. New York,
NY: Knopf.

Thomas, D., & Brown, J. S. (2011). A new culture of learning: Cultivating the imagination
for a world of constant change. Lexington, KY: CreateSpace?.

The Dalton School (2016). Philosophy: The Dalton Plan. Retrieved from http://www.
dalton.org/information.

van der Ploeg, P. (June, 2013). The Dalton Plan: Recycling in the guise of innovation.

Paedagogica historica, 49(3), 314–329. 10.1080/00309230.2012.725840.

Watters, A. (2017, June 9). The histories of personalized learning [web log post].

Retrieved from http://hackeducation.com/2017/06/09/personalization.

Woolley, D. R. (1994). PLATO: The emergence of an online community. Retrieved from
http://www.thinkofit.com/plato/dwplato.htm.


Approaches to         2

Personalized Learning

Overview of Personalized Learning Approaches

So much has been said and written about personalized learning (PL) starting
with describing it as a one-to-one computing model or One Laptop Per
Child (OLPC), to couching it as a pedagogy, a learning approach, a tech-
nological concept, a new canopy for blended learning, e-learning, individ-
ualized learning, differentiated instruction, or an adaptive learning system
pushed by ed-tech software companies. As research suggests, PL is an idea
struggling for an identity (McRae, 2015; Shemshack & Spector, 2020).

Given this ambiguity, it is important to consider why we are studying PL
in the first place. This chapter provides evidence-based research that dem-
onstrates the effectiveness of PL across multiple contexts, including K-12,
Higher Education, and Workforce Training and Development Programs.
Before presenting this research, we begin with efforts to define PL.

Efforts to Define Personalized Learning

As with any new construct, PL has different definitions that emphasize or
deemphasize aspects of how instruction is personalized for learners. Debates
arise about what personalizing learning means. For example, what is person-
alized (e.g., content, interface, delivery mechanism, etc.), who facilitates the
personalized learning (e.g., the individual, a manager or supervisor, the
instructor, the training department, a collaborative network of peers, or
the learning system itself), or how personalized learning should occur
(e.g., implicitly or explicitly referencing user behaviors or inputs, referencing the

DOI: 10.4324/9781003121008-2


18 Approaches to Personalized Learning

characteristics of associated peers or segmented groups, or employing a hybrid
mix of implicit and explicit feedback). It’s important to note that the types of
data sources used to personalize include implicit or explicit feedback. These may
be based on the learner’s role, learner tasks, individual proficiency (perceived or
performance-based), learner preferences, or learner goals (Fake & Dabbagh,
2019; Fan & Poole; 2006; Kwon, Cho & Park, 2010; Kwon & Kim, 2012).
In reviewing the definitions, one can see that each context changes the
emphasis on these variables. As Shemshack and Spector (2020) state, the lack
of a unified definition is one of the most critical problems with PL. To
encapsulate the differences, we’ve included definitions from the different
contexts, including K-12, Higher Education, and Workforce Training and

Development Programs below.

For K-12 Learning, we borrow from the U.S. Department of Education
definition which states: Personalized Learning refers to instruction in which
the pace of learning and the instructional approach are optimized for the
needs of each learner. Learning objectives, instructional approaches, and
instructional content (and its sequencing) may vary based on learner needs.
In addition, learning activities are meaningful and relevant to learners, driven
by their interests, and often self-initiated (U.S. Department of Education,
2017). While the socio-technical relationships are not stated explicitly here,
they are implied. This implication may account for the blended focus of
most K-12 PL implementations (Fake, 2018).

Another definition from the American Institute of Research (AIR) em-
phasizes a number of ways teachers in K-12 contexts can personalize learning
for students, including the way their day is structured, the ways they engage
with content, and even how interactions between teachers and students can
facilitate personalization. In this, AIR describes many different aspects of
who can personalize, what can be personalized, and how one can personalize
learning. There is also a recognition that alignment between approaches may
be necessary as PL programs scale. This is reflected in the following defini-
tion from Division 15 of the American Psychological Association (APA)
(Walkington & Bernacki, 2021):

Personalized Learning (PL) refers to a broad assortment of approaches
and programs for adapting instruction to learner characteristics to
achieve learning outcomes. The range of possible PL approaches is quite
diverse and includes (but is not limited to): the use of technology for
individualized instruction, rotation models where students move
between different instructional formats, learner profiles that assist
teachers’ decision-making, student-driven academic goal setting,


Approaches to Personalized Learning 19

project-based learning, social-emotional learning, and competency-based
learning where students master concepts at their own pace.

PL in K-12 contexts is often implemented at the school, district, or
even state level when stakeholders come together around a particular
set of PL approaches and thus definitions surrounding PL seem to
espouse a blended approach.

Definition of PL from Higher Education

In Higher Education, researchers’ emphasis is given to the learner-centered
approach of PL emphasizing flexibility and student agency as reflected in this
definition by Dede, Richards, and Saxborg (2019, p. 3). Personalized
Learning is defined as having four fundamental attributes:

1  Developing multimodal experiences and a differentiated curriculum
based on universal design for learning principles;

2  Enabling each student’s agency in orchestrating the emphasis and process
of their learning, in concert with the evidence about how learning works
best and with mentoring about working towards a long-term goal;

3  Providing community and collaboration to aid students in learning by
fostering engagement, a growth mindset, self-efficacy, and academic
tenacity; and

4  Guiding each student’s path through the curriculum based on diagnostic
assessments embedded in each educational experience that are formative
for further learning and instruction.

Zhong (2022), however, examined current design trends of PL in higher
education through a systematic review of the research literature. This study
found that despite high interest, there was a low level of maturity in the field
of PL as evidenced by a lack of structure and sequencing for PL learning
materials as well as acknowledgment of learner readiness. The review also
indicated that implementations, definitions, approaches, models, and terms
associated with PL in Higher Education vary greatly. Of the existing studies,
most focus on structuring and sequencing learning materials for adaptive
path systems by adjusting instruction to learning traits such as cognitive and
learning styles, personality, and prior knowledge. This last point also un-
derscores a focus on adaptive or systems-based approach to PL.

Other definitions from workforce training and development programs focus
on learner-centered personalization. For example, the results of a Delphi study


20 Approaches to Personalized Learning

(Fake, 2018) revealed that experts conceive of personalized learning as char-
acterized by new teaching roles and practices, flexible learning pathways,
flexible learning assessments, a focus on creating a learner-driven experience
based on their defined needs, and where technology is integral to learning.
In this definition, PL is seen as learner-driven and facilitated through a variety
of socio-technological interrelationships extending beyond content (Fake,
2018; Fake & Dabbagh, 2020; Fake & Dabbagh, 2021).

Another definition from the workplace learning literature that emphasizes the
use of technology posits that “personalized learning technologies attempt to
create different experiences for different learners (or for the same learner) at
different points in time” (Folsom-Kovarik, Chen, & Mostafavi, 2019, p. 181).
The authors go on to say that this approach to PL involves using technology to
customize settings for the learner based on individual preferences resulting in
differentiated instruction. This system can be continuously adjusted based on
incoming data (analytics) to adapt to users – often touted as “the benefits” of PL.
While this definition can be interpreted as adaptive or systems-based per-
sonalization, modern technologies are increasingly supporting learner-based
personalization by allowing learners to leverage transparent analytics to search
within   a curated and targeted set of learning resources and select learning tasks
that best suit their individual goals, prior experiences, demonstrated knowledge

and performance, environmental conditions, and/or social contexts.

Despite the multitude of aforementioned approaches and the lack of
maturity of the PL as a defined strategy, studies across contexts have shown
positive and tangible results and learning outcomes associated with PL.
These include PL initiatives cultivating a sense of ownership, developing
skillsets, scaffolding lifelong learning practices, reducing time spent on
learning tasks or locating relevant materials, or navigating information
overload (Bersin, 2017; Dabbagh & Kitsantas, 2012; Leone, 2013; Valtonen,
et al., 2012). The definitions provided above also offer a variety of ap-
proaches to implementing PL, with three approaches that seem to clearly
emerge: the systems-based approach, the learner-based approach, and the
blended approach to PL. In the next few pages, we will explore the research
in each approach to PL for each context (K-12, Higher Education, and
Workplace Training and Development).

Research on Systems-Based Personalization

Systems-based personalization refers to a learning experience where the
system makes the choice of what, how, when, where, and why learning is


Approaches to Personalized Learning 21

personalized. Similar to Pressey and Skinner’s historical learning machines,
systems-based personalization seeks to offer immediate feedback on the
students’ performance based on predefined tasks (Fake, 2018; Watters,
2021). Depending on the sophistication of the system, it may even recom-
mend other tasks that support learners to achieve specific learning goals and
achieve a certain level of competency (Skinner, 1958).

For the purposes of this book, systems-based personalization also
includes recommendation systems that may reference static learner profiles,
preferences, or styles that are not revisited, but are collected within the first
or first series of interactions with the learner. In the next few paragraphs, we
will explore existing systems-based learning in K-12, Higher Education, as
well as in workforce and informal learning contexts.

Systems-Based Personalized Learning in K-12

Domenech, Sherman, and Browns (2016) define PL from a systems per-
spective when they say “we envision a transformation in how children are
taught and how the system organizes for learning” (p. 6). They go on to say
that each K-12 child or student will be treated as a unique individual
requiring a personalized education plan. Each student will be assessed on the
subjects to be taught, and based on the results of the assessment, personalized
lesson plans will be developed that build on what the student already knows
and provide scaffolding through the use of instructional strategies that are
aligned with the student’s ability level. This personalized instructional
approach will also take into account student interests and learning profile as
well as emerging workplace and postsecondary competencies or what is
known as 21st-century skills such as self-regulation, metacognition, collab-
oration, problem-solving, critical thinking, creativity and innovation, social
responsibility and cultural environmental and global awareness, and social-
emotional and physical development to name a few.

In order to achieve this level of breadth and depth of PL, technology
will need to play a major role in this approach in order to monitor
student progress and adapt instruction accordingly. Domenech, Sherman,
and Browns (2016) add that students will have the freedom to work
independently as well with teachers and peers to design personalized
approaches to mastering competencies to include online, self-paced courses, a
range of multimedia-driven options for interactivity within the learning
environment, mastery-focused skills and concept progression via technology-
enhanced modules, adaptive digital content accommodating varying


22 Approaches to Personalized Learning

readiness levels, student interests and learner profiles, game-based learning
options, and embedded assessments using different learning progressions
and pacing (p. 96). The ultimate goal is to use technology to address the
unique needs and talents of every learner by allowing technology to act as a
recommender system that offers suggestions and instructional programs
and resources based on the student profile, knowledge, likes and dislikes,
educational and professional goals, and motivation.

In terms of traditional systems-based personalization, computer-based
adaptive learning programs have been around for a long time in K-12 public
schools (Wang & Liao, 2011). Researchers have attempted to study how
computer-based adaptive learning programs provide access to learning in rich,
engaging, and interactive environments in which students acquire new skills
(e.g., Hooshyar et al., 2021; Puntambekar & Kolodner, 2005; Quintana et al.,
2004). The underlying assumption of researchers’ efforts is that computer-
based adaptive learning programs provide students with an infinite supply of
personalized one-to-one attention that a teacher in a traditional classroom
could not provide in today’s highly diverse schools or simply due to a large
number of students in each classroom. Computer-based adaptive learning
programs can be loaded with scaffolding functions that observe students,
interact with them, interpret their learning behavior, and scaffold their learning
to allow teachers to focus on face-to-face classroom instruction (Bimba et al.,
2020; Graesser, & McNamara, 2010; Hannafin, Land, & Oliver, 1999;
Zulfiani, Suwarna, Miranto, 2018). In addition to scaffolding, computer-based
adaptive learning programs can capture and analyze learners’ interactions and
provide an abundance of data to teachers and administrators. Such data can
provide a lens for educators and researchers alike to understand how students
learn (Romero & Ventura, 2010).

In recent a study, Amro (2019) examined the effect of different types of
scaffolding on student achievement as measured by an end-of-year (EOY)
benchmark assessment in a middle school mathematics computer-based
adaptive learning program. The findings showed that soft or dynamic scaf-
folds followed by frequent hard or static scaffolds were the most significant
predictors of students’ achievement scores. More specifically, the instruc-
tional strategy of probing and diagnosing used by online instructors who
were available to address student questions and understanding as they
completed the computer-based adaptive program was the most effective soft
scaffolding strategy in supporting students’ problem-solving tasks. The study
also revealed that students’ performance levels impacted the frequency of soft
scaffolding strategies. Specifically, students in the below basic and far below
basic groups may not have the adequate skills to interact meaningfully with


Approaches to Personalized Learning 23

online instructors. These findings should be taken into consideration when
designing systems-based personalization to support students’ problem-
solving skills in K-12 settings.

Systems-Based Personalized Learning in Higher
Education

In Higher Education, research on systems-based personalization focuses on
learner preferences and learning styles (Fake, 2018; Zhong, 2022). For
example, in order to evaluate the impact systems-based personalization had
on online learning environments, Milicevic, Ivaonic, and Budimac (2011)
conducted an experiment (N = 440) to measure first-year undergraduate
student perceptions and performance in an online Java course using a
learning recommender system called the Programming Tutoring System or
Protus. Designed to adapt to students’ individual learning styles and
knowledge levels, Protus collected student interaction, behavioral, and log
data to identify learning styles and patterns as well as user habits through
data mining and interaction analytics.

Based on the information gathered, students were clustered into groups
using Felder and Silverman’s Index of Learning Styles and an algorithm
recommended content to the student based on their learner profile and PL
parameters. The results of this intervention revealed that students who had
access to the recommender system were able to complete a course in less
time than students in the control group. Also, seventy percent of learners
using the Protus system found it to be convenient and were pleased with
the accuracy and speed of the system’s recommendations. Despite the
enthusiasm learners expressed and the potential time savings, the Protus
system did not demonstrate significant differences in student learning
outcomes. Additional research is needed to determine if Felder and
Silverman’s Index is an effective means of personalization for improve-
ments  in learning outcomes.

In  another  higher  education  systems-based  personalization  study,
Chookaew, Panjaburee, Wanichsan, and Laosinchai (2014) developed a
personalized basic computer programming course for undergraduate stu-
dents (N = 23) to measure the learner’s performance in a pre and post-test
experiment. The system created by Chookaew et al. (2014) personalized
instruction based on the individual’s learning preferences and performance
on a pre-test assessment. The pre-test assessment sorted students based on
their aptitude at low, medium, or high levels. Low performance on the


24 Approaches to Personalized Learning

pretest indicated to the system that further remedial or support content
was necessary before the student could advance to more challenging topics.
These topics were assigned a preordained order so one could not advance
to a new topic until the student performed at a minimal level of compe-
tency. In addition to adapting to the students’ performance, content in the
course was presented based on the students’ learning preferences according
to another index created and researched by Felder and colleagues, the
Felder and Soloman Index of Learning Questionnaire.

A post-test analysis of the basic computer science course demonstrated a
normalized gain in conceptual knowledge, and ad hoc feedback from stu-
dents indicated favorable views of the system.

Overall, while there has been excitement surrounding systems that
personalize instruction based on learning or cognitive preferences with
results that suggest these programs increase user speed and satisfaction,
there have been mixed findings regarding the effectiveness of systems that
personalize based on user performance. In an experimental study, Griff and
Matter (2013) split 587 anatomy and physiology students from six dif-
ferent colleges and universities into an experimental and a control condi-
tion. Participants in the experimental group were assigned chapters from
McGraw Hill Higher Education’s (MHHE) LearnSmart, an online study
tool that adapts quiz questions to learners based on their previous per-
formance. Participants in the control condition were assigned online
quizzes from the question bank supplied by MHHE’s textbook. Results
between the two groups showed no significant differences in pre/post-test
performance, grade distribution, or retention (Griff & Matter, 2013). The
researchers did notice, however, that there was a positive effect on pre/post-
test performance and grade distribution for two out of the six institutions.
Inquiries into what factors may have influenced the differences in results,
however, were inconclusive.

In follow-up feedback sessions, instructors reported that learners
assigned to the experimental condition asked more challenging questions
in classroom sessions and seemed more engaged than users in the control
condition. In addition, instructors reported that MHHE’s LearnSmart
program did not take much time to integrate and implement into their
current courses. The mixed results of this experiment suggest that the
LearnSmart tool may not have been aligned with the course objectives at
the respective institutions (Griff & Matter, 2013) further supporting the
argument that for PL interventions to be successful, it will be imperative
that designers align technologies, strategies, and learning outcomes to
ensure success.


Approaches to Personalized Learning 25

Systems-Based Personalization in Workforce
Training and Development Programs

Given that there are so many learning opportunities online, many workforce
learners complain about feeling overwhelmed by the amount of information
available (Kulkarni, Rai, & Kale, 2020; Pelster et al., 2017). Despite the
number of opportunities online, it becomes difficult to evaluate what might
help advance the learner’s goals or what might support their continued
learning. Therefore, many of the systems-based personalization efforts in
workforce training and development programs have focused on recommender
systems.

For example, Skillsoft and IBM analyzed data from over 32,000 learners
to optimize a recommendation system for users. Leveraging insights from
user feedback, consumption patterns, and user behaviors the new system
generated recommendation emails based on student web log data. According
to  a Skillsoft press release, personalized recommendations based on past user
behaviors resulted in a 128% improvement in user engagement when
compared to their baseline (Skillsoft, 2014).

It is important to note that this particular study measured whether student
visits to learning content would increase with systems-generated email
campaigns based on previous behavioral student usage trends and content
consumption. This study did not measure the effectiveness of personalization
based  on the ultimate educational outcomes, but rather site visits to learning
content. Therefore, future studies are needed to ascertain the impact such
efforts had on learner outcomes.

An important aspect to consider in the design of recommendation systems
(RS) is how to generate learner profiles for recommendations. These types of
recommendations may be based on implicit (behavioral) or explicit (user-
generated) feedback (Kulkarni, Rai, & Kale, 2020). As machine learning evolves,
new algorithms focus on a variety of variables in order to create user profiles.

Previous research has revealed that learners are often not as aligned with
their actual interests as they perceive. Lavie, Sela, Oppenheim, Inbar, and
Meyer (2010) found that RSs that tailored content based on explicitly
described personal interests in static learner profiles were not always con-
sistent with the actual interests of the user according to log data and other
behavioral analytics. For instance, users tended to rate their interest in
Lifestyle and Leisure and Science and Technology articles significantly higher
than their actual interest level (measured in the number of articles read). The
researchers additionally found that timeliness was significantly more
important in topic areas focusing on politics, sports, business, and finance


26 Approaches to Personalized Learning

than in the domains. Finally, users in this experiment tended to be interested
in more general topics than specific ones.

This particular finding suggests that any personalization system will need
to strike a balance between over-personalizing RS to provide too narrow a
topic scope and providing relevant content that meets the interests of the
learner. It will also be important to consider how to motivate users to go
beyond their comfort levels and dig deeper into content that is new and
challenging. Since the users’ espoused interests and actual interests could be
different, a combination of user-generated, network-generated, and behav-
ioral data may be key to determining the actual wishes of the learner. It may
also offer the system the opportunity to inform the learner of differences in
their professed interests and actual behaviors which begs questions about
whether or not the learners’ goals are consistent with their actual espoused
interests.

The literature shows that the results associated with systems-based learning
initiatives have been mixed. Based on this synthesis, systems-based person-
alization has shown encouraging results in learning domains that have well-
defined rules like basic computer programming or beginning language
learning courses. There is also evidence that systems-based PL may drive
positive results in user satisfaction, performance when specifically applied to
structured tasks, engagement, perceived cognitive load, and completion
times. Other studies suggest that how educational technology is im-
plemented may impact the success of the PL initiatives. As we have previ-
ously discussed, it is critical that a pedagogical alignment exists between the
choice of PL technology, the instructional strategy, and the learning outcome
(Dabbagh & Fake, 2016; Gallagher & Prestwich, 2013). Consideration of
these variables is key to implementing PL effectively.

Many of the systems-based attempts at personalization focus on content as
opposed to other learning interactions. This may present opportunities for
future researchers to explore how systems might personalize other facets of
the learning experience. Despite the gaps, the results indicate that systems-
based personalization merits further exploration, especially in consideration
of how to encourage the best learning outcomes.

Research on Learner-Based Personalization

For the purposes of this chapter, Learner-Based Personalized Learning
refers to a learning experience wherein the learner drives the choice of what,
how, when, where, and why the learning is personalized. A common


Approaches to Personalized Learning 27

approach that captures user-based PL in the literature is through the tech-
nosocial construct of Personal Learning Environments or PLEs (Dabbagh &
Castaneda, 2020). PLEs embody the socio-material entanglement with
which people learn as well as an approach that enacts contemporary ideas
about how people learn. PLEs are built by the student using social media
technologies to support the accomplishment of individual learning tasks and
goals (Dabbagh & Kitsantas, 2012).

Learner-Based Personalization in K-12 Contexts

A study by Drexler (2010) examined students‘ construction of a personal
learning environment (PLE) in a 7th-grade science class to study poisonous
and venomous life forms. Students (N = 100) used social media technologies
such as Google Scholar, science-specific search engines, videos, blogs, articles,
and books, as well as API widget technology, to access, organize, and syn-
thesize content into a PLE using Symbaloo as an aggregating tool. The study
examined the processes students go through when using technology to
construct a PLE in a middle school science class. Findings revealed that
students applied the processes of practicing digital responsibility and digital
literacy; organizing content; collaborating and socializing; synthesizing and
creating; and taking responsibility and control for learning. These findings
are supported by higher education research on PLEs that demonstrates the
pedagogical affordances that social media have in supporting and promoting
student self-regulation learning strategies by enabling the creation of PLEs
(Dabbagh & Kitsantas, 2012; Kitsantas & Dabbagh, 2010). It is important
to note that Drexler’s research also took into consideration student readiness
to accomplish the learning objectives by scaffolding the construction of PLEs
using appropriate instructional strategies and gauging the level of support
based on student needs. The processes the students used to construct the
PLE informed a model of the networked student that will serve as a
framework for future instructional designs involving learner-based person-
alization.

In another study (Verpoorten et al., 2010) based on learner-based per-
sonalization using the construct of PLEs, nine 14/15-year-old students used
Web 2.0 technologies in a formal learning context to access, collect, and
organize resources on a specific topic by finding and tagging relevant digital
resources in their PLEM (Personal Learning Environment Manager) and to
look at the evolution of their tags cloud. PLEM is a rich tool that allows the


28 Approaches to Personalized Learning

organization of a personal collection of Web resources. The findings of this
study through self-reported student data revealed that the action of finding
and tagging resources affected four dimensions of their learning experience:
satisfaction, feeling of learning, effects on memorization and understanding,
and personalization of the learning sequence.

In a study by Crompton (2013), fifteen (N = 15) boys from a single-
gender, preparatory school, enrolled in grades 8–12, volunteered to partici-
pate in a research project aimed at exploring the concept of a PLE within a
formal school environment in order to understand potential reactions to the
concept by students and to generate ideas for possible larger-scale imple-
mentation within a particular environment. The participants were trained in
the use of a number of Web 2.0 tools that formed their PLE. They were
encouraged to base the construction of their PLE and PLN (Personal
Learning Network) on a single personal interest. Their interests ranged from
film to food to soccer to musicals. The results of this study revealed that
while there was enthusiasm from students toward creating their own personal
learning environment using these technologies, activity was at its peak when
a new tool was introduced. Most students also found it difficult to integrate
building a PLE into their daily routine and commented that it would be
easier to make the use of these tools a habit if there was an ecosystem of PLEs
within the school that all members of the community used. This research
suggests that in K-12 contexts, there needs to be a certain momentum, both
internal and external to the student, for the implementation of this kind of
learner-based personalization. Specifically, K-12 students need to learn how
to learn and develop self-regulated and metacognitive skills so that they can
tailor their learning around specific interests, and learn to a point, at their
own pace and on their own.

Netcoh and Bishop (2017) also witnessed the power and challenges of
PLEs when they evaluated the effectiveness of a Middle School’s PL program
called E-Time. This initiative sought to provide students 55 minutes a day to
pursue an independent project using any of the tools, resources, or tech-
nologies that were available to them. Each of the personalized project plans
was vetted and reviewed by a teacher who served as an instructional coach
and partner instead of an authority figure. Participants were all required to
create a deliverable and instructors were available to support the students’
learning process, provide check-ins, inquire about student progress, as well as
offer suggestions, advice, and mentorship.

The findings of this experiment showed that students valued and em-
braced the autonomy associated with pursuing their own learning goals. On
the other hand, tensions arose between teachers and students regarding the


Approaches to Personalized Learning 29

boundaries of autonomy. Since boundaries were not clearly defined or de-
lineated early on, a few students expressed that teacher inquiry infringed on
their independence. Teachers, on the other hand, mentioned concerns about
the academic rigor of the student projects and were concerned about time-
lines for deliverables. Some students also struggled with the profusion of
choice and indicated feeling lost or unmotivated without teacher guidance.
In these instances, teachers had difficulty structuring new pathways to
learning and knowing when to guide or inform student choices. Finally,
teachers also struggled to know which times they should expose students to
new ideas or embrace student choices.

Given this tension, future initiatives may benefit by setting expectations
early on, emphasizing the student’s choice as a commitment between the
student and teacher towards a mutually agreed upon goal. It is also clear that
training may be helpful to support teachers as they navigate the framing,
norms and expectation-setting phase, set scaffolds for struggling students,
and to navigate how to best facilitate the collaborative relationship between
teachers and students.

Learner-Based Personalization in Higher Education
Contexts

Similar themes of setting expectations early on reverberate in Higher
Education settings as well. Utilizing the framework of the personal learning
environment (PLE), Valtonen et al. (2012) studied the construction of PLEs
created by 33 students from vocational and polytechnic schools based in
Finland. As part of a one-credit course, students were encouraged to develop
a PLE following introductory sessions that explored both the conceptual
framework of PLEs and how to construct a PLE using technological tools.
An analysis of the artifacts revealed that students perceived PLEs as en-
vironments for reflection, areas to showcase skills, and places to support
collaboration and networking (p. 735). Challenges associated with PLEs
included frustrations regarding the compulsory nature of PLE construction,
issues with collaboration, and difficulties navigating new information com-
munications technologies (ICT). Lack of time, unsurprisingly, was also cited
as a common obstacle for learners. Valtonen et al. also found that students
often did not explore past the technologies that were modeled by the
instructor creating significant obstacles for the students to collaborate.
Ultimately, this study suggested that future interventions that support the
development of PLEs in higher education contexts include increased


30 Approaches to Personalized Learning

scaffolding, information communications technologies demonstrations, as
well as increased instructor and technological support.

In another approach to learner-based PL, Perez-Garcia et al. (2022) ex-
plored flexible learning itineraries, or co-created collaborative curriculums
developed by professors and students as an approach to PL with students in
the Balearic Islands to evaluate if this approach supported students in the
development of self-regulation skills while also offering a sense of autonomy.
Despite reported difficulties, the researchers reported that students indicated
a high level of engagement and satisfaction in the learning process with the
argument that this approach also facilitated 21st-century skill development
by developing learners’ skills and interdisciplinary knowledge.

Dabbagh, Kitsantas, Al-Freih, and Fake (2015) conducted a qualitative
case study on how learners construct personal learning environments (PLEs)
to achieve their learning goals. In-depth semi-structured interviews revealed
that students constructing PLEs engaged in self-regulated learning skills,
including goal setting, task strategies, self-monitoring, and self-evaluation.
Also, participants described feeling intrinsically and extrinsically motivated
while creating their PLEs. The presence of self-regulated learning (SRL) skills
suggests that learners were starting to take charge of their learning process
supporting previous evidence that SRL processes can be enabled through
social media technologies (Dabbagh & Kitsantas, 2012; Dabbagh &
Kitsantas, 2013). Given these findings, the construction of PLEs as an
approach to learner-based personalization could foster the development of
lifelong learning skills. Ultimately, supporting students in the development
of these skills could be critical in preparing workforce learners for the
challenges of the 21st-century world.

Learner-Based Personalization in Workforce
Training and Development Contexts

Student-driven approaches to PL in workplace training and development
contexts have also seen encouraging empirical results. In 2014, 80 teachers
from 45 Denver Public Schools (DPS) engaged in Project Cam Opener. As a
part of the teachers’ professional development, participating teachers worked
with an online mentor to create a Personal Professional Learning Plan (PPLP)
to improve their teaching. Participants were tasked to capture and post six
recordings of their teaching and reflections before, during, and after the filmed
classroom session over a six-month period on Google+. Instructional coaches
and peers commented on the posts and offered feedback.


Approaches to Personalized Learning 31

According to the Department of Education’s case study of Raleigh’s
program, an end-of-year survey showed that 90% of teachers felt engaged in
their professional learning (Raleigh, 2014). Teacher attrition rates also
dropped below historic levels facilitating several development opportunities
for the participating teachers while also increasing loyalty, engagement, and
reducing employee turnover. Further exploration is necessary to understand
if this program supported enhanced teaching practices or student outcomes.
The evidence suggests, however, that PPLPs may increase engagement in
training programs by fostering and incentivizing ownership over the learning
process.

In yet another approach to learner-based PL, researchers explored and
questioned how Personal Learning Environments (PLEs), or personal and
social learning spaces that encourage self-directed learning enabled by
Web 2.0 technologies could translate to corporate workplace learning
environments (Caboul, Chleffer & Vaissiere, 2016). While Learning
Management Systems (LMS) and eLearning programs are common within
the workplace, the researchers pointed out that the adoption of PLEs is still
limited. Citing potential organizational obstacles associated with privacy and
security, Caboul et al. (2016) emphasized that PLEs may support increased
self-directed training opportunities. On the other hand, the researchers argue
that PLEs will also need to show a clear return on investment in order to be
adopted within the workplace. Other obstacles to adopting PLEs in the
workplace included gaining buy-in from key stakeholders, obtaining suffi-
cient IT and infrastructure support, reconciling misalignment between
individual and workplace goals, and transitioning from a didactic pedagog-
ical model to one that is more collaborative in nature. Ultimately, the re-
searchers felt the implementation of PLEs would be difficult to employ
within the workplace due to these organizational challenges. Instead, they
suggested the use of system-based personalization to support PL and devel-
opment in the workplace.

Wunderlich (2016) argues that PLEs have been present organically in
organizations and in training programs that support self-directed learning
(SDL) as part of their training initiatives. Wunderlich points to multiple
examples of Fortune 500 companies that support an SDL approach,
including Disney, Aetna, Xerox, American Airlines, and Motorola. In her
mixed methods exploratory research study, Wunderlich (2016) investigated
how healthcare professionals constructed PLEs in a Leadership Academy to
facilitate ongoing training and development for new supervisors and man-
agers. She found that PLEs decreased the centralization of employee learning,
created a higher demand for technology training, increased opportunities to


32 Approaches to Personalized Learning

challenge the institutional authority, required high levels of motivation and
informational literacy, and benefited from clear company technology rules
and regulations. For example, many employees were concerned that their
internet searches were monitored and were unclear whether or not they could
use social media or Web 2.0 technologies at work to build their PLEs.
Wunderlich suggests that organizations should offer technical and informa-
tional literacy courses as well as increase operational awareness of existing
technological regulations. Ultimately, she highlighted that the practice of
learner-based personalization such as the creation of PLEs could help learners
develop critical thinking skills, support a habit of continuous learning, and
assist learners as they adapt to the ongoing changes facing professionals in the
workforce.

In learner-based personalization, the focus is on student ownership,
agency, and interests. The research here demonstrates how PLEs foster the
development of self-regulated learning skills which support the continuous
learning necessary for 21st-century contexts. Trailblazing the path to
implementation, Raleigh reported on an example of how PL could be lev-
eraged   to decrease employee attrition rates while increasing loyalty and en-
gagement in the teaching process. Her program not only leveraged a PL
technique to encourage reflection and experimentation, but also facilitated
new professional relationships and a culture of learning and experimentation
amongst colleagues. Finally, Caboul (2016) and Wunderlich (2016) explored
the potential opportunities, obstacles, and concerns associated with inte-
grating PLEs, a learner-based PL approach, into the workforce context.

These studies support the argument that scaffolding or facilitating the
development of PL environments will encourage the formation of lifelong
learning skills and self-regulated learning in students and learners overall.
The results suggest helpful recommendations for how to create PL for
higher-order thinking skills and how to extend educational opportunities
beyond the formal classroom. The application of PLEs in Higher Education
and Workforce Training and Development Programs provides encouraging
insights into the practice. It is clear, however, that alternative methods of
assessment would be useful to promote this powerful construct and advance
its use in Workforce Training and Development Programs. Continued
experimentation with the application of PLEs, new mechanisms of assess-
ment, and exploration into how to measure the effectiveness of PLEs
offer great opportunities for future research. All in all, these studies indicate
that learner-driven personalization offers a promising space (assuming stu-
dent motivation) to increase employee ownership of the learning and
development process.


Approaches to Personalized Learning 33

Research on Blended Personalized Learning

Not all personalization systems are exclusively user or system-centric. Many
PL initiatives mix aspects of systems-based and user-based personalization.
Therefore, in this book, Blended Personalized Learning refers to imple-
mentations where both systems and learners are involved in personalizing the
learning experience. This approach seeks to leverage systems to perform tasks
that support the individual learner while also respecting learner ownership
and agency in the learning process. Recognizing that learning occurs in a
range of contexts, Blended Personalized Learning implementations tend to
consider the comprehensive learning experience. Technology, therefore, is
used to enhance an individual’s holistic learning experience, rather than
being used to make decisions for the learner based on a linear or pre-defined
branched pathway of predetermined learning tasks.

An example of Blended Personalized Learning could include systems that
recognize user locations and offer content relevant to the goals or tasks that
learners have indicated an interest in or check-ins about learning goals with
an instructor or coach following an experience with instructional technology
(Freed et al., 2014).

Blended Personalized Learning in K-12 contexts

Blended PL initiatives have already shown positive results in the domain of
K-12 education. According to the Bill and Melinda Gates’ sponsored report
conducted by the RAND Corporation, initial research into blended person-
alized programs learning shows statistically significant increases in math and
language arts scores for students in 62 elementary and middle charter schools
(Pane et al., 2015). Students who were exposed to blended PL strategies went
from being below to above national averages in less than two years.

As an aspect of this study, the RAND corporation analyzed the school’s
implementation of the five PL strategies to include developing learner pro-
files, personal learning paths, competency-based progression, flexible learning
environments, and initiatives to encourage college and career readiness. In
these implementations, learners leveraged a variety of social, content, and
technological touchpoints to achieve their learning goals. The researchers
found that these elements were applied differently within each school system.
Also, they stated that some of the initiatives, like competency-based learning,
were more difficult for schools to implement than others. According to the
report, three practices emerged as being particularly beneficial to the PL


34 Approaches to Personalized Learning

programs. These included grouping students based on their learning data
with individuals who had similar needs, discussing data with students to help
shape and refine their learning goals, and cultivating learning environments
and spaces that supported PL practices.

Another success in K-12 comes from Leap Innovations, an organization that
recognized that a more holistic and blended approach to PL was necessary for
the success of PL programs in the school system. LEAP Innovations provided
grants and funds to public schools in order to match schools with vetted
educational technologies or learning platforms that supported literacy through
PL. Following the selection of educational technology, LEAP Innovations
worked with educators to implement the technology and later on to evaluate
whether the educational technology intervention supported learner and pro-
gram success (LEAP Innovations, 2016). Evaluating criteria used in the
selection of learning technologies required that the technology or learning
platform be: (1) learner connected – which was defined by the researchers as a
means to offer a learner resources beyond the traditional confines of the tra-
ditional school system, (2) learner-focused to support tailored instruction that
adjusts based on the learner’s strengths, weaknesses, and interests, (3) learner
demonstrated to present learners the ability to advance or review content and
training based on individual performance, and (4) learner-led to give students
the opportunity to take ownership over their personal development. Results of
the LEAP program suggest that students who qualified for free or reduced-price
lunch noticed a 45% reduction in the achievement gap after participating in
LEAP’s Personalized Learning Programs. An interesting facet of this is how
blended learning techniques (e.g., those that encouraged social touchpoints)
tended to perform better than those which were more focused on the tech-
nology. These findings suggest that a consideration of the technology, people,
processes, and procedures are all important when considering integrating PL.
Another interesting finding of the LEAP Innovations (2016) study sug-
gests that educational technology implementations that embraced one device
per child or provided supplementary instruction performed better than
instructors who pursued a rotation model which involved students practicing
literacy tasks by visiting different stations. Therefore, in addition to im-
plementing new technologies, considerations of instructional structure, en-
vironment, and approach can have a net positive outcome in cultivating a

robust learning environment.

In yet another approach to blended personalizing learning, Massachusetts’
54 Innovation Schools implemented a flexible learning system to support
students and their authentic and self-directed educational choices (U.S.
Department of Education, 2017). In this approach, schools were encouraged


Approaches to Personalized Learning 35

to explore new strategies to improve learning outcomes and reduce the
achievement gap. Led by Governor Patrick, this initiative sought to provide
funding to schools that were interested in experimenting with introducing
flexibility into the school’s curriculum, budget, schedules and calendars,
staffing, professional development, and school district policies. For example,
Pentucket Regional School District’s program implemented an approach
that allowed students to choose learning opportunities beyond the normal
school day to include online and blended coursework as well as off-campus
learning opportunities, internships, and apprenticeships (U.S. Department of
Education, 2017). The results of these initiatives are currently being gath-
ered. However, it does demonstrate that school systems are embracing
multiple strategies and resources to cultivate a more personalized approach
toward learning.

Blended Personalized Learning in Higher
Education

In Higher Education, Roberts, Howell, and Seaman (2017) explored the
usage of personalized student dashboards and facilitated a co-design work-
shop with students to understand what might support their further growth
and development within the existing data analytics system used in Australia.
Five key themes emerged about the design of these big data analytics
dashboard systems that would further support the students’ learning. Themes
from this research indicated that each student wanted to have access to the
same learning opportunities regardless of their performance in the system, an
ability to elect whether to compare their performance data to others or not,
ensure that dashboards remained private, and if any comparison were en-
abled that it would be delivered as an anonymous aggregate, automate any
alerts, and allow students to customize the metrics that are most important to
them in their learning process.

An element of the existing dashboard that received mixed feedback was the
use of a traffic light indicator (green, yellow, and red) regarding someone’s
performance in a learning experience. While some students valued the
simplicity of the approach, others complained that these types of indicators
are vague and can be somewhat discouraging. These findings suggest that
students are demanding opportunities to customize learning dashboards to
best suit their learning, motivational, and emotional needs.

Student responses indicated that they were interested in the system sup-
porting their personal choices rather than alerting them about work they


36 Approaches to Personalized Learning

should be doing stating that these types of interactions might be pesky and
decrease the desired usage within the system.

Ku, Hou, and Chen (2016) conducted a study with (N = 120) under-
graduate and postgraduate students at a Northern Taiwanese university to
evaluate two game-based learning implementations that personalized the
presentation of the learning materials based on the learner’s identified
cognitive style. This study sought to explore the impact of Pask’s holism and
serialism cognitive styles on perceptions of two different game environments.
Following a cognitive preferences assessment, students were assigned to ei-
ther  a customized or personalized game-based learning environment. In the
customized condition, the students were able to alter the interface and enable
or disable certain features and functionalities of the game. In the personalized
condition, however, participants were offered a different experience based on
the results of their cognitive styles assessment. To measure the two experi-
mental conditions, game preferences, game behaviors, satisfaction levels, as
well as pre and post-test scores, were documented. The results indicated there
were no statistical differences in performance between customized or per-
sonalized game-based learning environments. However, players were more
satisfied with games that supported a customized user interface and allowed
for adjustments to the available features and functionalities. Beyond the
discovery of increased satisfaction rates, researchers also found that holists
were more likely to turn off the music while playing the game and use hints
in order to guide and support their performance.

The findings imply interesting behavioral differences between holists and
serialists. It is also interesting to note how customization and personalizing
an interface impacted learner satisfaction. While both customized and per-
sonalized game-based learning supported learner performance, these findings
may also indicate that encouraging learner ownership, embracing learner
agency, and supporting customization by introducing personalized interfaces
could increase user satisfaction and also potentially increase continued par-
ticipation in learning and development programs.

Blended Personalized Learning in Workforce
Training and Development

Recognizing the lack of personnel resources for onboarding, training, and
mentoring new and existing employees, SRI International and Advanced
Distributed Learning (ADL), collaborated to create the Pervasive Learning
System (PERLS), a personal assistant learning mobile tool that adapts to the


Approaches to Personalized Learning 37

learner based on what learning tasks they would like to pursue as they
transition to a new organization, organizational role, or in keeping pace with
changes inherent in the modern age (Craig et al., 2022; Freed et al., 2014).
PERLS promotes various learning actions by providing recommendations on
general topics as well as parameters based on the learner’s location, learning
history, training requirements, content engagement, desired learning activi-
ties, available time, and interests. Conceptually, the system is designed to
predict user patterns, behaviors, and preferences in order to suggest training
content that may reflect the user’s context. For instance, if a meeting is
delayed and hosted in a new location, then the user may receive a prompt to
explore resources through the learning app to fill the time and learn about
their new location. The learner then has the choice of whether to engage in
the content or browse an assortment of options based on their previous
browsing or consumption patterns. In doing this, the technology identifies
the opportunity for training, and the individual can then select from a series
of options that align with their learning needs and interests.

The implementation of PERLs has resulted in significant reductions in
attrition in Army Air Assault School and has even been advocated and
advanced by NATO to address the training and development needs of DoD
employees. Here the fusion of learner agency and data-informed contextual
awareness support and prompt self-directed learning activities by identifying
times and places where learning could occur. For example, PL for PERLS
requires a consideration of the participant’s location, user patterns, time of
day, learning behaviors, preferences, and potentially espoused learning goals.
As the tool continues to be developed, the various variables and dimensions
associated with this interpretation of PL will become clearer.

In Workplace Training and Development, Advanced Distributed
Learning, an organization focused on training programs for the Department
of Defense, has identified PL as a strategy for optimizing learner outcomes
and supports multiple projects that are further exploring its impact on
learner outcomes (ADL website, n.d.). Research on the PERvasive Learning
System and Personal eBook for Learning seeks to explore PL from learning
assistants to adaptive resources. The continued investment in these domains
suggests that the DoD continues to see the promise of PL.

Ultimately, this chapter reveals that there are still several gaps in the research
with regard to understanding the impact personalization could have within
online learning environments and what impact PL practices may have on
making content more engaging, impactful, and relevant in online learning.
Very few studies from this chapter for example have looked at how person-
alizing the channel (e.g., e-mail, text message, podcast, etc.), learning interface,


38 Approaches to Personalized Learning

functionality, or learning environment (e.g., classroom setting, community of
practice, self-driven eLearning, study groups) could impact learning outcomes.
As you will note, a majority of the studies focus solely on personalizing content.
Combining different PL methods could yield interesting experiments and
results.

Of the studies reviewed, PL was shown to increase engagement, loyalty,
and retention in teacher development and even air assault schools. These
initaitives effectively connect workforce learners with learning resources. PL
was also seen by the American Institute of Research as being a compelling
strategy for overcoming the challenges of teaching adults lacking basic
educational backgrounds and skills. Wunderlich (2016) demonstrated that
PL happens organically, but may be stifled unless organizations are cognizant
of how certain learning activities are perceived. Observing the PLEs of
healthcare professionals, Wunderlich provided heuristics and insights into
what policies and initiatives organizations could pursue to support ongoing
and self-directed continuous education efforts. Finally, Fake and Dabbagh
(2020) detailed current perceptions and ad hoc implementations of PL
within corporate contexts and found that practitioners struggle to under-
stand how to successfully implement PL into Workforce Training and
Development Programs.

Beyond these studies, it is also important to note and recognize that there
are a few platforms that currently “personalize” learning. These include
powerful cloud-based software systems like Degreed, Codeacademy, and
Skillsoft. These platforms tend to employ adaptive pathing which references
information gathered in data mining, user behavior, user performance, and
explicit feedback as the main instructional methods. Degreed and Skillsoft
also are centralized learning management systems (LMSs) that utilize a wide
spectrum of tools to personalize learning. While adaptive path technologies
and forward-thinking LMSs may be powerful ways to engage workforce
learners, it is important to explore broader and more flexible applications of
how to empower individuals by using and embedding learning technologies
and programs since these implementations may not be best suited for all
learning outcomes.

It is also important to note that adaptive path technologies are an
attractive way to scale PL as well as retrieve learner metrics. However, many
of the available adaptive systems may be expensive and difficult to implement
within a typical organizational environment. Also, a recent report by Ho,
Jones, Cole, and Sanchez (2018) indicates that of the training and devel-
opment leaders (N = 271) surveyed, only 13% believe their adaptive pro-
grams are currently effective. Adaptive path PL efforts may also be less


Approaches to Personalized Learning 39

effective at facilitating learning for ill-structured, emotionally driven, and
complex high-order thinking tasks compared to other PL approaches.

Based on the existing review, there is strong evidence that PL is an effective
strategy for improving learning outcomes in K-12, Higher Education,
and even in the limited studies available for Workforce Training
and Development. As such, implementing PL as a strategy appears to be
a valuable means of supporting professionals as they learn and grow as
21st-century practitioners. The research suggests that PL may also be an
effective means to help organizations become more competitive, flexibly
respond to change and uncertainty within the business environment, and
retain top talent. While PL is viewed favorably by the literature, Training
Teams struggle to develop and implement PL (Fake & Dabbagh, 2018).
As mentioned before, to implement PL workforce leaders may require
additional frameworks, tools, technologies, and proven techniques for
integrating PL into their existing curricula.

We continue in the next chapter describing the Personalized Learning
Interaction Framework (PLiF) and how this approach can provide a flexible
framework for supporting the development of personalized learning pro-
grams.

References

Amro, F. (2019). Scaffolding students problem solving skills in a computer‐based
adaptive learning program: An analysis of scaffolding types and strategies. Doctoral

dissertation, George Mason University. Proquest.

Bersin, J. (2017, March 27). The disruption of digital learning: Ten things we have
learned [web log post]. Retrieved from  https://joshbersin.com/2017/03/the-
disruption-of-digital-learning-ten-things-we-have-learned/.

Bimba, A. T., Idris, N., Al-Hunaiyyan, A., Mahmud, R. B., & Mohd Shuib, N. L. B.
(2020). Adaptive feedback in computer-based learning environments: A review. Adaptive
Behavior, 25(5). https://doi-org.mutex.gmu.edu/10.1177/1059712317727590.

Caboul, E., Chleffer, N., & Vaissiere, C. (2016). Adapting Personal Learning
Environments to the workplace? [PDF file]. Retrieved from https://f.hypotheses.org/
wp-content/blogs.dir/1236/files/2016/10/Article_AdaptingPLE.pdf.

Chookaew, S., Panjaburee, P., Wanichsan, D., & Laosinchai, P. (2014). A personalized e-
learning environment to promote student’s conceptual learning on basic computer
programming. Procedia – Social and Behavioral Sciences, 116, 815–819. 10.1016/
j.sbspro.2014.01.303.

Craig, S. D., Siegle, R. F., Li, S., Cooper, N. R., Liu, Y., & Roscoe, R. (2022). An
investigation of the PERvasive learning systems impact on soldiers’ self-efficacy for
self-regulation skills. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual
Meeting, 66(1), 742–746. DOI: 10.1177/1071181322661491.


40 Approaches to Personalized Learning

Crompton, H. (2013). A historical overview of mobile learning: Toward learner-centered
education. In Z. L. Berge & L. Y. Muilenburg (Eds.), A Historical Overview of Mobile
Learning: Toward Learner-centered Education. Routledge.

Dabbagh, N., & Castaneda, L. (2020). Beyond personalization: The PLE as a framework
for lifelong learning. Educational Technology Research and Development, Special Issue,
68(6), 3041–3055.

Dabbagh, N., & Fake, H. (2016). Tech Select decision aide: A mobile application to
facilitate just-in-time decision support for instructional designers. TechTrends (2017),
61, 393–403. Available from https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11528-016-

0152-2.

Dabbagh, N., & Kitsantas, A. (2012). Personal learning environments, social media, and
self- regulated learning: A natural formula for connecting formal and informal
learning. Internet and Higher Education, 15. 10.1016/j.iheduc.2011.06.002

Dabbagh, N., & Kitsantas, A. (2013). Using learning management systems as meta-
cognitive tools to support self-regulation in higher education contexts. In R. Azevedo
and V. Aleven (Eds.), International Handbook of Metacognition and Learning
Technologies (pp. 197–212). New York, NY: Springer Science.

Dabbagh, N., Kitsantas, A., Al-Freih, M., & Fake, H. (2015). Using social media to
develop Personal Learning Environments (PLEs) and self-regulated learning skills: A
case study. International Journal of Social Media and Interactive Learning Environments,
3(3), 163–183. 10.1504/IJSMILE.2015.072300

Dede, C., Richards, J., & Saxberg, B. (2019). Learning Engineering For Online Education:
Theoretical Contexts and Design-based Examples. Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group.
Drexler, W. (2010). The networked student model for construction of personal learning
environments: Balancing teacher control and student autonomy. Australasian Journal

of Educational Technology, 26(3), 369–385.

Domenech, D., Sherman, M., & Brown, J. (2016). Personalizing 21st Century Education:
A Framework for Student Success. Wiley.

Fake, H. (2018). A Delphi Study on the Dimensions of Personalized Learning in Workforce
Training and Development Programs. [Doctoral dissertation, George Mason
University]. Proquest.

Fake, H., & Dabbagh, N. (2019). Dimensions and Applications of Personalized Learning in
Workforce Training and Development Programs: A Delphi Study. Proceedings of eLearn
2019. New Orleans, LA: Association for the Advancement of Computing in
Education (AACE).

Fake, H. & Dabbagh, N. (2020). Personalized learning within online workforce learning
environments: Exploring implementations, obstacles, opportunities, and perspectives
of workforce leaders. Technology, Knowledge and Learning. Advance online publica-
tion. 10.1007/s10758-020-09441-x

Fake, H., & Dabbagh, N. (2021, October). The Personalized Learning Interaction
Framework: Expert Perspectives on How to Apply Dimensions of Personalized Learning
to Workforce Training and Development Programs. In Ninth International Conference
on Technological Ecosystems for Enhancing Multiculturality (TEEM ’21) (pp. 501–509).

Fan, H., & Poole, S. (2006). What is personalization? Perspectives on design and
implementation of personalization information systems. Journal of Organizational
Computing and Electronic Commerce, 16(3), 179–202. 10.1207/s15327744joce1
603&4_2


Approaches to Personalized Learning 41

Folsom-Kovarik, J. T., Chen, D.-W., Mostafavi, B., & Brawner, K. (2019). Measuring
the complexity of learning content to enable automated comparison, recommenda-
tion, and generation. Adaptive Instructional Systems, 188–203. 10.1007/978-3-03
0-22341-0_16

Freed, M., Yarnall, L., Dinger, J., Gervasio, M., Overholtzer, A., Roschelle, J., &
Spaulding, A. (2014). PERLS: An Approach to Pervasive Personal Assistance in Adult
Learning [Conference presentation]. Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation, and
Education Conference (I/ITSEC), Menlo Park, California.

Gallagher, P. S., & Prestwich, S. (2013). Developing a Personalization Strategy for Online
Learning Environments. Unpublished manuscript.

Graesser, A., & McNamara, D. (2010). Self-regulated learning in learning environments
with pedagogical agents that interact in natural language. Educational Psychologist,
45(4), 234–244.

Griff, E. R., & Matter, S. F. (2013). Evaluation of an adaptive online learning system.
British Journal of Educational Technology, 44(1), 170–176. 10.1111/j.1467-8535.2012.
01300.x

Hannafin, M. H., Land, S., & Oliver, K. (1999). Open learning environments:
Foundations, methods, and models. In C. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional-design
Theories and Models: Volume II (pp. 115–140). Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Ho, M., Jones, M., Cole, M., & Sanchez, I. (2018). Personalized and adaptive learning
[white paper]. Retrieved from https://www.td.org/research-reports/personalized-and-
adaptive-learning-shaping-employee-development-for-engagement-and-performance.

Hooshyar, D., Pedaste, M., Yang, Y., Malva, L., Gwo-Jen, H., Wang, M., Lim, H.,
Delev, D., (2021). From gaming to computational thinking: An adaptive educational
computer game-based learning approach. Journal of Educational Computing Research,
59(3), 383–409. https://journals-sagepub-com.mutex.gmu.edu/doi/pdf<underline>/

</underline>10.1177/0735633120965919.

Kitsantas, A., & Dabbagh, N. (2010). Learning to Learn with Integrative Learning
Technologies (Ilt): A Practical Guide for Academic Success. Information Age Publishing.
Available from http://infoagepub.com/products/Learning-to-Learn-with-Integrative-
Learning-Technologies.

Ku, O., Hou, C. C., & Chen, S. Y. (2016). Incorporating customization and personal-
ization into game-based learning: A cognitive style perspective. Computers in Human
Behavior, 65, 359–368. 10.1016/j.chb.2016.08.040.

Kulkarni, P. V., Rai, S., & Kale, R. (2020). Recommender system in eLearning: A survey.
In: S. Bhalla, P. Kwan, M. Bedekar, R. Phalnikar, and S. Sirsikar (Eds.), Proceeding of
International Conference on Computational Science and Applications. Algorithms for
Intelligent Systems. Springer. 10.1007/978-981-15-0790-8_13.

Kwon, K., Cho, J., & Park, Y. (2010). How to best characterize the personalization
construct for e- services. Expert Systems with Applications, 37, 2232–2240. 10.1016/
j.eswa.2009.07.050.

Kwon, K., & Kim, C. (2012). How to design personalization in a context of customer
retention: Who personalizes what and to what extent? Economic Commerce Research
and Applications, 11, 101–116. 10.1016/j.elerap.2011.05.002.

Lavie, T., Sela, M., Oppenheim, I., Inbar, O., & Meyer, J. (2010). User attitudes towards
news content personalization. Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 68, 483–495. 10.
1016/j.ijhcs.2009.09.011


42 Approaches to Personalized Learning

LEAP Innovations (2016). Finding what works: Results from the LEAP Innovations Pilot
Network. Retrieved from http://www.leapinnovations.org/images/PN_C1_Research_
Brief_FINAL_red.pdf

Leone, S. (2013). Characterisation of a Personal Learning Environment as a Lifelong
learning tool. New York, NY: Springer Science & Business Media. 10.1007/978-1-4
614-6274-3.

McRae, P. (2015, June 17). Myth: Blended Learning Is the next ed Tech Revolution - Hype,
Harm and Hope. National Education Policy Center. Retrieved November 29, 2022,
from https://nepc.info/blog/myth-blended-learning.

Milicevic, A. K., Vesin, B., Ivanovic, M., & Budimac, Z. (2011). E-Learning personal-
ization based on hybrid recommendation strategy and learning style identification.
Computers & Education, 56. 10.1016/j.compedu.2010.11.001

Netcoh, S., & Bishop, P. A. (2017). Personalized learning in the middle grades: A case
study of one team’s successes and challenges. Middle Grades Research Journal, 11(2),
33–48. 10.1080/00940771.2017.1297665

Pane, John, Steiner, Elizabeth, Baird, Matthew, & Hamilton, Laura. (2015). Continued
Progress: Promising Evidence on Personalized Learning. 10.7249/rr1365

Pelster, B., Johnson, D., Stempel, J., & van der Vyver, B. (2017, February). Careers and
learning: Real time, all the time [Research Report]. Retrieved from Deloitte Insights:
https://www2.deloitte.com/insights/us/en/focus/human-capital-trends/2017/learning-
in-the-digital-age.html?id=us:2el:3dc:dup3818:awa:cons:hct17#endnote-4.

Perez-Garcia, A., Tur Ferrer, G., Villatoro Moral, S., & Darder-Mesquida, A. (2022).
Itinerarios de aprendizaje flexibles en entornos digitales para un aprendizaje perso-
nalizado en la formación docente, RIED. Revista Iberoamericana de Educación a
Distancia, 25(2), 173–193.

Puntambekar, Sadhana, & Kolodner, Janet L. (2005). Toward implementing distributed
scaffolding: Helping students learn science from design. Journal of Research in Science
Teaching, 42, 185–217. 10.1002/tea.20048.

Quintana, C., Reiser, B. J., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Fretz, E., Duncan, R. G., Kyza, E.,
Edelson, D., & Soloway, E. (2004). A scaffolding design framework for software to
support science inquiry. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(3), 337–386. 10.1207/
s15327809jls1303_4.

Raleigh, J. (2014). Project Cam Opener [Syllabus]. Denver, CO: Denver Public Schools.

Retrieved from https://canvas.instructure.com/courses/990019.

Roberts, L. D., Howell, J. A., Seaman, K. S., & Gibson, D. C. (2017). Student attitudes
toward learning analytics in higher education: “The fitbit version of the learning
world”. Frontiers in Psychology, 7. 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01959.

Romero, C., & Ventura, S. (2010). Educational data mining: A review of the state of the
art. IEEE, 40(6), 601–618. 10.1109/TSMCC.2010.2053532.

Shemshack, A., & Spector, J. M. (2020). A systematic literature review of personalized
learning terms. Smart Learning Environments, 7(1). 10.1186/s40561-020-00140-9.

Skillsoft (2014). Skillsoft’s Big Data Initiative Delivers Improved Learning and Engagement
Outcomes. Retrieved from http://www.skillsoft.com/about/press_room/press_releases/
november_18_14_ibm.asp.

Skinner, B. F. (1958). Teaching machines. Science, 128(3330), 969–977. 10.1126/
science.128.3330.969


Approaches to Personalized Learning 43

U.S. Department of Education. (2017). Reimagining the role of technology in education:
2017 National education plan update. Retrieved from National Educational
Technology Plan Website https://tech.ed.gov/files/2017/01/NETP17.pdf.

Valtonen, T., Hacklin, S., Dillon, P., Vesisenaho, M., Kukkonen, J., & Hietanen, A.
(2012). Perspectives on personal learning environments held by vocational students.
Computers & Education, 58, 732–739. 10.1016/j.compedu.2011.09.025.

Verpoorten, D., Chatti, M., Westera, W., & Specht, M. (2010). Personal Learning
Environment on a procrustean bed – Using PLEM in a secondary‐school lesson. In

C. A. Shoniregun, & G. A. Akmayeya (Eds.), Proceedings of the London International

Conference on Education (LICE) (pp. 197–203). LICE.

Walkington, C., & Bernacki, M. (2021). Making classroom learning personalized. APA
Division 15 Policy Brief Series, 1(4), 1–6.

Wang, Y., & Liao, H. C. (2011). Data mining for adaptive learning in a TESL-based
e-learning system. Expert Systems with Applications, 38(6), 6480–6485. 10.1016/
j.eswa.2010.11.098.

Watters, A. (2021). Teaching Machines. MIT Press.

Wunderlich, D. (2016). Personal Learning Environments for Business Organizations

(Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from Proquest (10105016).

Zhong, L. (2022). A systematic review of personalized learning in higher education:
Learning content, structure, learning materials sequence, and learning readiness.
Interactive Learning Environments. Advance online publication. 10.1080/10494820.2
022.2061006

Zulfiani, Z., Suwarna, I. P., & Miranto, S. (2018). Science education adaptive learning
system as a computer-based science learning with learning style variations. Journal of
Baltic Science Education, 17(4), 711–727.


Designing Personalized  3

Learning Experiences

Using the PL Interaction
Framework (PLiF)

Using the Delphi Method to Establish A
Framework for Personalized Learning

Linstone and Turoff (2002) argue that throughout history, humans have
performed ceremonies, liturgies, and rituals to cultivate a better under-
standing of the future. Whether it was through sacrificing animals, inter-
preting the alignment of stars, or consulting the induced visions of Pythia,
the priestess of Apollo, humans have consistently sought mechanisms to
understand, interpret, and forecast future events and scenarios.

As time has progressed, the forecasting rituals of ancient civilizations have
been debunked, demystified, and replaced with new practices which reflect the
latest thinking on how to interpret the world. One such method that controls for
social pressures and embraces the iterative refinement of expert opinions is the
Delphi Method. The Delphi Method has been employed in multiple industries
and areas of study to inform decision-making, forecast the future, or compre-
hensively explore a divisive issue (Brady, 2015; Iqbal & Pipon-Young, 2009;
Mitroff & Turoff, 2002; Parente & Anderson-Parente, 2011; Zolingen &
Klaasen, 2003).

Popularized by the RAND Corporation during the Cold War, and ulti-
mately supporting a wide range of use cases and circumstances, the Delphi
Method is firmly rooted in the branch of Pragmatism and the social-
constructivist paradigm (Turoff, 2002). The method operates under the

DOI: 10.4324/9781003121008-3


Using the PL Interaction Framework (PLiF) 45

assumption that knowledge and decisions are influenced by the collective
expertise of stakeholders involved in an area of inquiry (McIntyre-Hite,
2016; Vygotsky, 1978). While the applications of Delphi may vary, the
method assumes that expert opinions will accurately predict future outcomes,
define priorities, develop decision-making models, or explicitly explain the
differences between several divergent opinions. The method is most often
used in circumstances wherein there is no precise way to observe the phe-
nomena or topic at hand such as personalized learning (Franc, 2016;
Linstone & Turoff, 2002).

As a research technique, the Delphi Method supports a variety of contexts
and circumstances. These could include instances wherein:

•  The research problem cannot be actively observed or analyzed, but
would benefit from collective subjective assessment (Keeney, Hasson, &
McKenna, 2011; Linstone & Turoff, 2002).

•  When problems are ill-structured and broad. In these situations, the
researcher sees the benefit of sampling multiple perspectives (Linstone &
Turoff, 2002).

•  When questions are politically divisive in nature and could be influenced
by a majority opinion or dominant personalities (Bolger & Wright,
2011; Linstone & Turoff, 2002; Mitroff & Turoff, 2002).

•  When logistical limitations restrict the experts’ abilities to meet on a
normal basis (Linstone & Turoff, 2002).

Each of these conditions is met in the challenge of better understanding
conceptions and dimensions of personalized learning within higher educa-
tion and workforce contexts. Here it is important to note that this work
focuses on higher education and workforce training and development pro-
grams since the foundational research grounding the PLiF originates from
these two aforementioned contexts. In the paragraph below, we explore how
the study of personalized learning adheres to these research requirements.

To begin with, the nature of Higher Education and Workforce Training
and Development is such that many of the individuals involved in devel-
oping personalized learning initiatives may not have ongoing contact with
one another or venture across their respective domains. Organizational silos
are common in both higher education and workforce development. Given
these silos and lack of contact, personalized learning is not a strategy that can
be actively observed or analyzed. This is not only because there are limited
personalized learning initiatives within industry and higher education, but
also because even within the existing initiatives, practitioners and researchers


46 Using the PL Interaction Framework (PLiF)

are using the same terms to mean vastly different personalized learning
implementations (Betts, 2018; Fake, 2018). Since there is no clear consensus
on what the term “personalized learning” means and since these character-
izations of personalized learning vary, research studies on personalized
learning as a practice are ill-structured and broad. Observing programs in
Workforce Training and Development programs is also a challenge given the
proprietary nature of the programs.

In addition to fostering a forum for exchange, anonymity is a key feature
of Delphi designs. Anonymity seeks to control the social dynamics that may
be present in focus groups. According to Hsu and Sandford (2007), the
aspect of participant anonymity is key to mitigating any coercion, manipu-
lation, or pressure to conform inherent in any group interaction. Therefore, a
critical strength of the Delphi method may be to help preserve the opinions
of experts while revealing any latent or unexplored assumptions, uncover
differences of opinion, as well as identify areas of authentic consensus
(Zolingen and Klaasen, 2003).

Using the Delphi method, we used multiple rounds of iterative survey
research in order to chart consensus and disagreements about the conception
of personalized learning, what dimensions are necessary to consider in per-
sonalized learning, as well as how these dimensions and components of these
dimensions should be applied given different case studies.

Of the 224 experts initially recruited for this study, N = 79 expert re-
searchers, practitioners, and workforce leaders participated in the first survey
(35% of the originally identified expert group). Of the experts in the first
round, n = 32 were researchers, n = 33 were practitioners, and n = 15 were
workforce leaders. Responses to the 65 overall personalized learning variables
and individual survey items had a high-reliability rate (α = .92).

Experts were each selected on carefully vetted criteria to include a con-
sideration of their leadership roles and titles, education, years of experience in
Learning and Development and Higher Education, conference presentations,
involvement in professional associations, publications in the domain of
personalized learning, awarded grant funding, and social presence in the
Learning Development Community. In order to maintain the anonymity of
the experts, demographic information was not disclosed throughout the
iterative surveys.

The result of the Delphi Study, which included 32 researchers, 33 practi-
tioners, and 15 workforce leaders, yielded a framework for personalized learning
called Personalized Learning Interaction Framework (PLiF). We present the
PLiF framework and its five types of interaction in the paragraphs below.


Using the PL Interaction Framework (PLiF) 47

The Personalized Learning Interaction Framework
(PLiF)

This research found that experts perceived personalized learning as a learner-
driven exercise. Experts considered the following themes to be elemental to
personalized learning to include embracing flexible resources (e.g., multi-
media experiences or organizational interactions), competency mapping
and setting expectations, assessment (e.g., self-assessment, needs assess-
ments, assessment in general), involving a community of practice or a
network (e.g., interacting with self-selected small groups or peers), mentor
or coach involvement (in an individual or group capacity), as well as pro-
viding overall implementation considerations.

These larger themes in themselves suggest a series of interactions that are
imperative to creating a personalized learning ecosystem for learners or a
Personalized Learning Interaction Framework (PLiF). Already inherent in these
themes are relationships between the learner and the content (Chapter 4), the
learner and other learners (Chapter 5), the learner and small groups
(Chapter 6), the learner and the mentor or coach (Chapter 7), and the
community of practice or social network (Chapter 8). Therefore, the themes
which emerged from this research suggest that effective personalized learning is
built upon an ecosystem of interactions between the learner and the outside
world, emphasizing learning as a social process.

The integration of different learning interactions is reminiscent and builds
upon Moore’s three-level interaction model. In this model, Moore proposes that
distance education involves three types of interactions. This includes a learner-
content interaction, a learner-teacher instructor, and a learner-learner inter-
action (Moore, 1989). Dabbagh and Bannan-Ritland expanded Moore’s types of
interaction and added learner-group interaction (Dabbagh & Bannan-Ritland,
2005). While Moore’s three types of interaction (and Dabbagh and Bannan-
Ritland’s addition) were proposed for use in distance education, the application
of Moore’s theory has more recently been leveraged and extended to support
blended learning environments (Best & Conceição, 2017; Dron, Seidel, &
Litten, 2004; Murray, Perez, Geist, & Hedrick, 2013). Since the agreed upon
personalized learning variables associated with learning in Higher Education and
Workforce Training and Development Programs include both in-person and
virtual components, Moore’s framework serves as a foundation to ground a
framework of personalized learning. Thus, this research yielded a framework of
personalized learning adding to Moore’s three-level interaction model. Figure 3.1
shows the types of interactions embedded in PLiF. Later in this chapter, we
provide an example of how PLiF might be implemented in an applied scenario.


48 Using the PL Interaction Framework (PLiF)

Figure 3.1 Personalized Learning Interaction Framework (PLiF).


Using the PL Interaction Framework (PLiF) 49

As you can see in Figure 3.1, there are five types of interactions. These
include (1) learner to content, (2) learner to learner, (3) learner to mentor,
coach, or Artificial Intelligent (AI) Assistant, (4) learner to small group, and

(5) learner to social network or community of practice. We will explore these
interactions and potential design considerations for implementing these in-
teractions in the paragraphs below.

Despite the acceptance of Learning Experience Designers (LED) or
Instructional Systems Designers (ISD) as stakeholders in personalized
learning, there was no reference to their role in expert responses. This sug-
gests that the role of LEDs and ISDs may be more passive in nature and
instead involved in setting up the systems, resources, and processes to sup-
port overall Workforce Training and Development Programs. Therefore, as
you will notice in Figure 3.1, LEDs and ISDs have been included but are
situated outside of the 5 types of interactions. Their positioning reflects
comments about LEDs and ISDs embracing a resource model wherein they
are responsible for managing the learning environment, curating and eval-
uating sources for cultivating different learner interactions, and overseeing
certain program elements. In this model, LEDs and ISDs become curators to
support personalized learning. While LEDs and ISDs are not central to the
design of the PLiF, in this framework, their role transforms to support
learners in continual facilitation of the learner’s ongoing growth and devel-
opment.

Please note the additional data in graph 3.1 that documents the type of
engagement that is enabled in the PLiF. This represents further expert feedback
In response to questions regarding how personalization should occur. Experts
referenced in this study only agreed on two methods of engagement that
constitute personalized learning. This included 1 to 1 and a mix of 1 to 1 and
1 to N (or Number of Overall Participants) engagements.

The learner’s ownership and agency over the learning process is further
upheld with experts rejecting Number of Participants (N) to Many or Total
Number (M) (e.g., personalizing based on observing the characteristics of a
group of learners, categorizing them, and applying these defined categori-
zations to a larger population.), M to N (e.g., by using generalized data
patterns of a large population and then applying those patterns to an indi-
vidual) and One to N (e.g., by grouping individuals based on similar char-
acteristics). Examples could include, but are not limited to, grouping
individuals based on their performance on a task.

What is common in each of these rejected methods of personalization is
that in each of these approaches (N to Many, Many to N, or One to N), a
judgment is made upon the individual which defines their experience.


50 Using the PL Interaction Framework (PLiF)

Instead, expert responses suggest that the learner should be empowered. The
acceptance of a mix of 1 to 1 and 1 to N methods towards enabling en-
gagements also acknowledges a social dimension to personalized learning,
however, this may be more aligned with the idea that at some point a learner
may require an external community of practice, social network or small
group support. This lines up with the findings surrounding who should
personalize learning since social relationships are inherent in the interactions
mentioned here.

Learner to Content Interaction

Learner to content interaction was described throughout the expert responses
in the Delphi study. In this, several design parameters emerged. To begin
with, the availability of multimedia resources to support learning (e.g., text,
video, audio, podcast) and flexible learning pathways were expressed as
critical in the learner-to-content interaction. This flexibility extended not
only to the types of content, but also the delivery type (e.g., web-based, text
messages, email) and technology that delivers the content (e.g., LMS plat-
forms, social media platforms), the instructional modality (e.g., synchronous,
asynchronous, blended), and the learning activities.

Key design parameters included that content needed to be enabled to be
referenced on the go, anytime, anywhere, and on any device. Also important
to note is the availability or range of different types of resources, accessibility
of resources, and the ability to self-select which resources are utilized. In
Chapter 4, we further explore the design parameters associated with sup-
porting this learner-to-content interaction. It can be anticipated that learners
pursuing a content interaction may need additional support in identifying
good resource materials. In this, learners will need to develop the skill sets to
identify what makes a resource credible and useful in the digital age.

Learner-to-Learner Interaction

Learner-to-learner interactions (which may also be referred to as peers) were
described as exchanges that enriched the learner’s experience by offering
ongoing dialogue and feedback about their training. Learners were described
by experts as gaining proficiency not only through their coaches, but by
gathering insights and resources from other learners or peers to complement
their strengths, address weaknesses, and improve overall learner performance.


Using the PL Interaction Framework (PLiF) 51

Experts espoused that learner-to-learner interactions would cultivate a more
collaborative organizational environment. This, in turn, offers a collegial and
collaborative discourse between learners which may further foster and cul-
tivate continual and self-sustaining training and development opportunities
for workforce learners. The literature supports these claims suggesting peer-
to-peer learning experiences support learners in benchmarking their per-
formance while also developing independent learning, relationship-building,
and collaboration skills (Batty & Sinclair, 2014; Ma, Xing, & Du, 2018). An
exploration of best practices to provide learner-to-learner or learner-to-peer
interactions is provided in Chapter 5.

As noted in Figure 3.1, the learner-to-learner interaction is a 1:1 en-
gagement but can be done with different partners which may facilitate several
1:1 engagements depending on the topic or way the interaction is facilitated.

Learner to Small Group Interaction

Small groups were also referenced as important interactions to support
personalized learning. Experts described the purpose of small group inter-
actions as a place to meet with others to address similar needs, questions, or
challenges based on specific strengths or weaknesses.

According to experts, how the groups are formed, their purpose or topic,
and how someone joins, are important aspects for consideration in person-
alizing the learning experience. Here self-selection is a key design consider-
ation. This resounding expert response reflects themes of self-selection (e.g.,
selecting content or selecting social interactions) that resonate throughout
the findings. It is also interesting to note that many of the expert responses
seemed to imply that small groups would be internally organized as opposed
to including individuals from outside the organization.

Small groups also enable a mix of 1:1 and 1:N engagements as learners
may talk with other individuals or in the group as a whole. Design param-
eters for setting up successful small groups will be explored more thoroughly
in Chapter 6.

Learner to Coach, Mentor, or Artificially Intelligent
(AI) Assistant Interaction

Experts also mentioned coaches, mentors, and AI assistants and their role in
the creation of personalized learning. Personalization facilitated by coaches


52 Using the PL Interaction Framework (PLiF)

can provide direction on the competencies required. Coaches may addi-
tionally point to resources and training materials that are relevant to the
learner. In expert responses, coaches or mentors were described as resource
providers, sounding boards, facilitators, and prompters that provided
accountability checks. Coaches were also seen as a force that could person-
alize learning for an individual or a group suggesting a multifaceted inter-
action with not only the individual learner, but also within a group of
learners.

Coaches, Mentors, and AI Assistants support 1:1 or a mix of 1:1 or 1:N
modes of engagement according to experts. This indicates an acknowledg-
ment that coaching, mentorship, or AI Assistants may support learners
individually or within groups. A distinction, however, must be made as a
small group also may support a mix of 1:1 or 1:N engagements. We will
explore the distinctions between coaches, mentors, and AI assistants further
in Chapter 7.

It is important to note that additional resources may be needed to train
and develop coaches and mentors to be effective in embracing all the dif-
ferent roles that they will need to fulfill in this personalized learning
framework (e.g., how to hold someone accountable, which resources might
help learners, providing encouragement, reviewing company metrics, etc.)
Therefore, in implementing personalized learning, organizations may need to
invest time and resources to support coaches in gaining the necessary skill
sets they need to serve Workforce Training and Development Programs.

Learner to Community of Practice

The Learner to Community of Practice interaction reflects the acceptance of
“the network or community of peers” as a dimension of personalized
learning. Communities of practice are “groups of people informally bound
together by shared expertise and passion for a joint enterprise” (Wenger &
Snyder, 2000, p. 139). The construct has become popular in the business
community and in organizations that focus on knowledge as intellectual
capital. Communities of practice are different from formal work groups or
project teams in that they are defined by knowledge rather than task, and
members are self-selecting rather than assigned by a higher authority (Allee,
2000). Interactions between the Learner and the Community of Practice are
seen as involving peers outside of the organizational context. This offers
learners the opportunity to leverage the insights of those who are dealing
with similar challenges, but in different use cases. Exposure to ideas outside


Using the PL Interaction Framework (PLiF) 53

of the employee’s organizational context may offer new perspectives and
insights into how to approach internal problems.

Similar to small groups, communities of practice also enable a mix of 1:1
and 1:N engagements. Participants in a community of practice again may
find themselves interacting in a multitude of ways given the multi-faceted
nature of group interactions.

A Note on Other Roles Explored By Experts

Interestingly, experts did not perceive personalized learning as a strategy sup-
ported purely by technologies. A hypothesis of the researchers prior to the study
was that experts would perceive personalized learning on a continuum with
adaptive path or system-based personalization technologies as better suited for
well-structured tasks. Conversely, ill-structured and wicked domains, such as
learning leadership skills would be better suited for user-based or hybrid forms of
personalized learning. The operating hypothesis was that the type of learning
technology selected would be associated with the learning task. Expert responses,
however, seemed to indicate that personalized learning was an approach that
transcended task-based thinking, but rather was a strategy that could be leveraged
on   a curricular or programmatic level. Pre-programmed adaptive path systems,
recommendation systems, and learning management systems were all rejected as
technologies associated with personalizing learning. Rather, personalized
learning entailed setting up systems of interactions to include a mix of social,
technological, and technologically enabled interactions which theoretically
facilitate a self-sustaining and ongoing ecosystem of resources and support.

The findings from this research suggest that experts perceive personalized
learning as an overarching strategy to approach training programs. Experts
described personalized learning as a larger instructional strategy. In this,
experts suggest a personalized learning strategy is made up of a compre-
hensive ecosystem of resources for learners which may encompass a range of
instructional approaches, activities, and interactions that are enabled by
technology rather than driven by tools.

The PLiF presented here is a reflection of these expert opinions which
iteratively evolved through the Delphi study. It represents a learner-centered
framework for PL which does not necessarily require technology, however, is
enhanced by leveraging the tools available in the market and given distrib-
uted workforces. An advantage of this approach is that despite any budgetary
constraints, the PLiF can be integrated to support and enable a learner-


54 Using the PL Interaction Framework (PLiF)

centered training approach grounded in the principles of andragogy. We
explore this alignment in the paragraphs below.

Alignment with Andragogy

Expert responses continually supported the role of the learner in driving and
personalizing their learning experience. It follows that the findings from this
research align well with the theories of andragogy, or the study of adult
education. According to Knowles (1984), andragogy is founded on four
principles. These include that:

1  Adults need to be involved in the planning and evaluation of their
instruction.

2  Experience (including mistakes) provides the basis for learning activities.

3  Adults are most interested in learning subjects that have immediate
relevance to their job or personal life.

4  Adult learning is problem-centered rather than content-oriented.

Based on this research, these principles of andragogy are well aligned with the
PLiF.

Alignment of Knowles (1984) Principles to Personalized Learning

Knowles Principles       How PLiF Supports Principle


Principle 1: Adults need to be
involved in the planning and
evaluation of their instruction.

Principle 2: Experience
(including mistakes) provides
the basis for learning activities.

Principle 3: Adults are most
interested in learning subjects
that have immediate relevance
to their job or personal life.

Learner selection of interaction and
resources facilitates this principle within
the framework. We will explore this
more in Chapter 10.

PLiF supports the development of
lifelong learning skills by offering a
framework that can be leveraged
throughout one’s career.

Learner selection of interaction and
resources facilitates this principle within
the framework. PL encourages learning
activities that are meaningful and
relevant  to learners, driven by their
interests, and often self-initiated. PL
incorporates the learner’s voice and
choice   of how and what they learn. PL
motivates learners by increasing the

                  relevancy of their learning experience 

(Continued)


Using the PL Interaction Framework (PLiF) 55

Knowles Principles       How PLiF Supports Principle


Principle 4: Adult learning is
problem-centered rather than
content-oriented.

The PLiF supports learning beyond
learning to content interactions,
providing support to the learner in a
multitude of ways as they seek to
solve   a problem. It also provides
project-based, authentic learning
activities.

As can be seen from this alignment, according to this research, experts
perceive personalized learning as a strategy that addresses all of the principles of
andragogy. The alignment of adult learning principles to personalized learning
is   a powerful way to engage learners by encouraging ownership and self-
sustaining interactions that maintain the learning and development process.

The principles of andragogy also advocate that the learner should be
involved in the process of defining expectations, determining how they will
be assessed and evaluated, formulating their learning plan, and challenged to
tackle projects and topics that are relevant to their personal life. The learner
agency or ownership described in andragogy is interesting in light of the
potential tensions which may arise in industry or higher education. It is clear
that the struggle between efficiency, return on investment, behavior tracking,
and the learner’s agency may also be a tension inherent in training programs.

An Example Application

In Figure 3.2, one can see an example of the PLiF in action. Here the learner
has identified public speaking or presentation skills as their area of focus. To
begin, the learner conducted a self-assessment of their current skills to identify
skills, gaps, and learning goals associated with public speaking. Then, following
the PLiF framework, the learner selects resources and support from the cor-
responding interactions. We explore these in the following table (Table 3.1).
Ultimately, experts support that personalized learning strategies should
encourage individual ownership over the learning process. The PLiF supports
learners in aligning the dimensions of personalized learning to their ultimate
learning goal or task. The guidelines presented here will support a multi-
faceted self-sustaining framework for personalized learning that enhances the
effectiveness and design of Higher Education and Workforce Training and
Development Programs. It is anticipated that the success of the proposed


56 Using the PL Interaction Framework (PLiF)

Figure 3.2 Application of PLIF for Presentation Skills.


Using the PL Interaction Framework (PLiF) 57

Table 3.1 Example of Developing Public Speaking Skills Using the PLiF

Interaction          Learner Practice

Learner to Content      Learner takes a class through Udemy on
presentation skills and watches TED
lectures to evaluate best practices.

Learner to Learner      Learner partners with another learner to
practice presentation skills, seek
feedback, and refine skill sets.


Learner to Mentor, Coach, or
AI Assistant

Learner works with mentors, coaches, or
AI Assistant to set actionable strategies
to meet goals associated with public
speaking.

Learner to Small Group     Learner joins a local Toastmasters chapter

to further hone and practice their skills.


Learner to Social Network or
Community of Practice

The aspiring learner joins 2–3
communities of practice on LinkedIn.

personalized learning strategy will be reflected in decreased attrition rates,
increased engagement in learning and development programs, and increased
confidence for the individual learner.

This research suggests that enabling learner agency in training and
development programs by encouraging learners to engage in the five learning
interactions of the PLiF will translate to positive business outcomes by
increasing productivity, meeting employee expectations, and supporting
companies as they weather the ebbs and flows of an ever-changing opera-
tional context. We continue by exploring how the thoughtful design of each
of these interactions in forming a personalized learning culture will enhance
the development of personalized learning interventions to empower in-
dividuals and organizations to reskill, retool, and adapt to the demands and
pace of the modern age. We will also provide use cases and pragmatic tools to
exemplify how to implement this framework in your organization.

References

Allee, V. (2000). Knowledge networks and communities of practice. OD Practitioner,

32(4). http://www.odnetwork.org/odponline/vol32n4/knowledgenets.html

Best, B., & Conceição, S. C. (2017). Transactional distance dialogic interactions and
student satisfaction in a multi-institutional blended learning environment. European
Journal of Open Distance and E-Learning, 20(1), 138–152.


58 Using the PL Interaction Framework (PLiF)

Betts, B. (2018). Demystifying personalized learning [Massively Open Online Course].
Retrieved from https://beta.curatr3.com/courses/demystifying-personalised-learning

Bolger, F., & Wright, G. (2011). Improving the Delphi process: Lessons from social
psychological research. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 78, 1500–1513.
10.1016/j.techfore.2011.07.007

Brady, S. R. (2015). Utilizing and adapting the Delphi Method for use in qualitative
research. International Journal of Qualitative Research Methods, 14(5). 10.1177/16094
06915621381

Batty, C., & Sinclair, J. (2014). Peer-to-peer learning in the higher degree by research
context: A creative writing case study. New Writing, 11(3), 335–346. 10.1080/14
790726.2014.932814

Dabbagh, D., & Bannan-Ritland, B. (2005). Online learning: Concepts, strategies, and
applications. Pearson Education.

Dron, J., Seidel, C., & Litten, G. (2004). Transactional distance in a blended learning
environment. Research in Learning Technology, 12(2), 163–174. 10.1080/0968776042
000216219

Fake, H. (2018). Personalized learning within online workforce environments. Fairfax,
Virginia, United States: Manuscript in preparation, College of Education and Human
Development, George Mason University.

Fake, H., Dabbagh, N., & Zhang, Z. (2019). Student perspectives of technology use for
learning in higher education. RIED. Revista Iberoamericana de Educación a Distancia,
22(1), 127–152.

Fake, H., & Dabbagh, N. (2020). Personalized learning within online workforce learning
environments: Exploring implementations, obstacles, opportunities, and perspectives
of workforce leaders. Technology, Knowledge, and Learning, 25(1), 789–809. DOI: 10.
1007/s10758-020-09441-x

Franc, J.M. (2016, October 24). Delphi technique: The do nots and why nots [video file].

Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v = GN6B8hgjQcw

Hsu. C.-C., & Sandford, B. A. (2007). Minimizing non-response in the Delphi process:
How to respond to non-response. Practical Assessment, Research, & Evaluation, 12(17).
https://pareonline.net/getvn.asp?v = 12&n = 17

Iqbal, S., & Pipon-Young, L. (2009). The Delphi method. The Psychologist …, 22, 598–601.
Retrieved from https://thepsychologist.bps.org.uk/volume-22/edition-7/delphi-method
Keeney, S., Hasson, F., & McKenna, H. (2011). Consulting the oracle: Ten lessons from

using the Delphi in nursing research. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 53(2), 205–212.
10.1111/j.1365-2648.2006.03716.x

Knowles, M. (1984). The adult learner: A neglected species (3rd ed.). Houston, TX: Gulf
Publishing.

Linstone, H.A., & Turoff, M. (2002). Introduction. In H.A. Linstone and M. Turoff
(Eds.), The Delphi method: Techniques and applications (pp. 3–12). Boston, MA:
Addison-Wesley Publication Company.

Ma, N., Xing, S. X., & Du, J. Y. (2018). A peer coaching-based professional development
approach to improving the learning participation and learning design skills of in-
service teachers. Educational Technology & Society, 21(2), 291–304.

McIntyre-Hite, L. (2016). A Delphi study of effective practices for developing
competency-based learning models in higher education. The Journal of Competency-
Based Education, 1(4), 157–166. 10.1002/cbe2.1029


Using the PL Interaction Framework (PLiF) 59

Mitroff, I. I., & Turoff, M. (2002). Philosophical and methodological foundations of
Delphi. In H.A. Linstone and M. Turoff (Eds.), The Delphi method: Techniques and
applications (pp. 35–67). Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley Publication Company.

Moore, M. G. (1989). Three types of interaction. American Journal of Distance Education,
3(2), 1–7. 10.1080/08923648909526659

Murray, M., Perez, J., Geist, D., & Hedrick, A. (2013). Student interaction with content
in online and hybrid courses: Leading horses to the proverbial water. Informing
Science: The International Journal of an Emerging Transdiscipline, 16, 99–115. 10.
28945/1779

Parente, R., & Anderson-Parente, J. (2011). A case study of long-term Delphi accuracy.
Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 78, 1705–1711. 10.1016/j.techfore.2011.
07.005

Turoff, M. (2002). The design of a policy Delphi. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, 2(2), 149–171. 10.1016/0040-1625(70)90161-7

Vygotsky, L. (1978). Interaction between learning and development. In Guavain & Cole
(Eds.) Readings on the development of children (pp. 34–40). New York, NY: Scientific
American Books.

Wenger, E.C., & Snyder, W.M. (2000). Communities of practice: The organizational
frontier. Harvard Business Review, 78(1), 139–146.

Zolingen, S. J., & Klaasen, C. A. (2003). Selection processes in a Delphi study about key
qualifications in Senior Secondary Vocational Education. Technological Forecasting and
Social Change, 70, 317–340. 10.1016/S0040-1625(02)00202-0


Designing for          4

Learner–Content

Interaction

Figure 4.0 Learner-content interaction.

When designing for learner content interaction, one must take into con-
sideration the multimedia modality of the content (e.g., text, video, audio),
the communication or technology medium used to deliver the content
(e.g., web-based, text messaging, email, social media), the instructional
delivery  modality  of  the  content  (e.g.,  synchronous,  asynchronous,

DOI: 10.4324/9781003121008-4


Designing for Learner–Content Interaction 61

blended, or bichronous), and the types of learning activities that will en-
gage learners with the content (e.g., online discussions, writing a blog or a
paper, creating a presentation, solving a problem). It is typical to have so
many variables to consider when using technology to design learner-
content interactions and it is also important that instructional designers be
intentional with how they design these interactions (Fake, 2018; Hodges
et   al., 2020). So again, the variables under consideration for this dimension
of the Personalized Learning Interaction Framework (PLIF) are:

•  Multimedia modality of content

•  ICT (Information Communication and Technology) medium

•  Instructional delivery modality (also known as communication synchrony)

•  Types of learning activities or tasks

We discuss each of these variables in this chapter and end with a case study
example.

Multimedia Modality of Content

Multimedia learning is defined by Mayer (2001) as a form of computer-
aided instruction that uses two modalities for delivering content concur-
rently such as visual learning (pictures, written text, animations, and vi-
deos) and verbal learning (spoken narration) (Swerdloff, 2016). In 2001,
researcher Richard Mayer introduced the twelve principles of multimedia
design in his book Multimedia Learning, where he discussed the best
practices for using multimedia in eLearning products (Mayer, 2001). In
2011, Clark and Mayer discussed two specific relationships between
multimedia and the learner’s experience with either static graphics (i.e.,
photos or illustrations) or dynamic graphics (i.e., video or animations).
More specifically, this multimedia principle attempts to answer the fol-
lowing questions: do graphics help learners learn more deeply than just
words alone, and if they do, how can instructional designers best leverage
graphics in developing eLearning?

To begin, we should define the major components of most eLearning
products. Regardless of industry, most eLearning products consist of words in
printed or spoken form and graphics in static (i.e., illustration, photo, charts,
graphs, etc.) and dynamic (i.e., animation, video, etc.) forms. eLearning for-
mats can be considered asynchronous web-based courses using Authoring
software (i.e., Articulate Storyline, Adobe Captivate, or Lectora, etc.)


62 Designing for Learner–Content Interaction

or web 2.0 authoring (i.e., Articulate Rise), or online synchronous/asynchro-
nous courses using a Learning Management System (LMS) such as courses
developed in Blackboard, Canvas, or Moodle. In addition, instructional vi-
deos, casual and serious games for learning, and personalized learning products
that include a combination of learner-learner and learner-content interaction
are popular formats of learning that are dominating the eLearning field as of
late. However, it is important to keep in mind that in any eLearning format,
words and graphics continue to serve as the primary delivery component, so it
is imperative for us to spend a little time discussing some best practices
in graphic use for eLearning products before diving into the discussion on
content interaction for personalized learning.

Mayer’s Multimedia Design Principle: Include Both
Words and Graphics

People learn best when they are learning actively. Active learning is defined as
“a method of learning in which students are actively or experientially involved
in the learning process where there are different levels of active learning,
depending on student involvement” (Bonwell & Eison, 1991). In a virtual or
eLearning environment, learners need to engage in relevant cognitive proces-
sing through activities within the course or training module, mentally organize
material in their minds into coherent cognitive representation, and integrate
the new knowledge obtained from the material presented in their minds with
their existing knowledge (Clark & Mayer, 2011). To help learners participate
in an active learning process, instructional designers must ensure their designs
within the eLearning environment guide and assist learners. One way to do so
is through the use of graphics in addition to textual information. Here are
some recommendations that were originally offered by Clark & Mayer (2011):

1  Select graphics that support learning: Use graphics with specific
functions whenever possible. Functions of graphics may include:

a  Decorative graphics – for decoration only and should be minimized.
If you are using decorative graphics, try using graphics that relate to
the textual content to avoid any cognitive disconnect.

b  Representational graphics – graphics that portray a single element.
This type of graphic is best used to demonstrate one physical item.

c  Relational graphics – graphics that show quantitative relationships,
such as bar graphs or line graphs. This type of graphic is best used
when discussing statistics.


Designing for Learner–Content Interaction 63

d  Organizational graphics – graphics that show the relationship
among elements. This type of graphic is best used when discussing
processes and procedures.

e  Transformational graphics – graphics that show the change in an
object over time. This might seem similar to organizational
graphics, but this type of graphic should be used when you are
demonstrating how certain things change over time, so this is best
used when giving step-by-step instructions.

f  Interpretive graphics – graphics that demonstrate invisible relation-
ships. This type of graphic should be used to show elements or
situations that cannot be seen by the naked eye, such as the
direction of the air.

2  Use graphics to teach content types – Clark and Mayer (2011)
identified five different kinds of content (described below), and graphics
can be used to enhance the teaching of each kind of content:

a  Facts – isolated information. Use representational (i.e., screenshots)
and organizational (i.e., company org charts) graphics.

b  Concepts – categories of objects, events, or symbols represented by a
single name. Use representational (i.e., pictures of mammals),
organizational (i.e., how mammals are organized), or interpretive
(i.e., cats and tigers with arrows between them to show relationship)
graphics.

c  Process – description of how things work. Use transformational
(i.e., images showing the different stages of water when boiling it),
interpretive (i.e., process graphics), or relational (i.e., Venn dia-
grams) graphics.

d  Procedure – a series of task-related steps. Use transformational
graphics (i.e., step-by-step screenshots of a software).

e  Principle – cause-and-effect relationship or the guidelines behind a
task. Use interpretive (i.e., animation demonstrating the result of
combining two chemicals) or transformational (i.e., instructional
videos of a mathematical concept) graphics.

3  Use graphics as topic organizers – If you are designing your own
learning environment using course authoring software such as Articulate
Storyline or Adobe Captivate, you may wish to use graphics as your
topic organizers to show the progress and relationships of each topic. In
a web 2.0 course development environment such as Adobe Rise, you
may be somewhat limited to using graphics as an overall course
organizer, but you may still use it with smaller concepts through the
creative use of various image tools.


64 Designing for Learner–Content Interaction

4  Use graphics to show relationships – When discussing relationships
and processes, it is often challenging for learners to comprehend through
text descriptions alone. A recommendation would be to start the process
explanation with a graphic to show the relationships and procedures,
followed by a textual description so learners can actively connect the
concepts cognitively.

5  Use graphics as lesson interfaces – You may also use a large image as an
overview of the concepts discussed with interactive points as subtopics
(i.e., using an image map) to give learners the freedom to discover
knowledge themselves. Whether the concepts are more organizational
(i.e., an org chart of a company) or a closer look at a concept (i.e., an
open image of a single cell with different parts of a cell highlighted),
graphic use can help learners connect the concepts together to allow
learners to create their own cognitive connections.

6  Examples of these principles are shown in Figures 4.1 and 4.2.

As described earlier, learning is a process in which the learner is actively
making sense of the information presented to them cognitively, and teaching
or instruction is the process through which a series of appropriate activities
are used to guide the learners in making such cognitive connections. One of
the important parts of active processing of the content is for the learner to
mentally construct representations of the material, whether the representa-
tion is pictorial or textual, and connect new information with their existing
knowledge. Through the use of both text and graphic elements, instructional
designers can assist learners in achieving this goal.

Another important consideration is the level of experience of the learners.
According to Mayer and Gallini (1990), novice learners who have low knowledge
of the domain require more assistance learning with graphics than experts who
have high knowledge in the domain, and learn well with or without graphics since
they can form mental images from their prior knowledge. However, some studies,
such as ones led by Kalyuga et al. (Kalyuga, 2005; Kalyuga, Ayres, Chandler &
Sweller, 2003), warned of the expertise reversal effect, where instructional support
aimed at novices may not help or could even hurt experts. This is an important
consideration when you are in the analysis phase of the instructional design
process, working with subject-matter experts, where you need to spend time
discussing the level of expertise of your target audience to make multimedia design
decisions. Keep in mind that if you are creating training that applies to an en-
terprise audience (i.e., mandatory training that is aimed at the entire organization),
you may need to apply additional strategies to cater to experts while keeping the
learning content targeting novices to ensure training is delivered effectively.


Designing for Learner–Content Interaction 65

Figure 4.1 Mayer’s Multimedia Principle: Select Graphics that Support
Learning.


66 Designing for Learner–Content Interaction

Figure 4.2 Use Graphics to Teach Different Content Types.

Special Consideration for Videos/Animations

With the relative ease of creating videos and animations currently, compared
to the past, there is a growing demand for using videos and animations for
visual learning. However, there are some reservations from researchers that


Designing for Learner–Content Interaction 67

you may wish to consider. The first is that videos and animations, sometimes
termed “active medium”, may foster passive learning behavior in learners
since they do not need to form mental images as all information is presented
to them. Another is that animations may cause cognitive overload with
sensory distractions such as music, flashing graphics, or images that are too
rich in detail. While the active medium has its place, it should be used as
supportive material to text and graphics, or “passive medium”, since texts
and graphics allow learners to create images and animations cognitively using
the new information with the learner’s existing knowledge. So when should
videos or animations be used rather than texts and images?

One recommendation is when the instructional objective requires per-
forming motor or complicated manual skills, which asks the learners to do
what the instruction is telling them without any conceptual knowledge. An
example of using videos rather than texts and images would be the active
shooter training that is now mandated in many state and governmental
agencies. As the learners are required to act in a high-stressed situation,
learners should react instinctively which is considered low in cognitive
processing. Therefore, the instructions should be clear, succinct, and
demonstrative when using videos so that learners can act and react accord-
ingly. In other words, the passive medium (text and graphics) may be most
effective for understanding concepts and processes, while the active medium
(videos and animations) may be more effective for hands-on procedures or
actions (Clark & Mayer, 2011).

Technologies for Content Delivery

When designing learner-content interactions, considering the type of tech-
nology used to deliver the content to the learner is critical. In other words,
how (through what medium) the content is communicated to the learner is
paramount. And why is that? Because technology is not just a delivery tool or
medium, rather, different technologies have different potentials or educa-
tional benefits. Therefore understanding the “affordances” (action potentials)
of technology will help us make discerning decisions about which tools are
the most appropriate for a given learning context (Bower, 2017). As Marshall
McLuhan, a Canadian philosopher whose work is among the cornerstones of
the study of media theory purports: the medium is the message. In other
words, one cannot separate the medium from the message because the
medium impacts or shapes the message. McLuhan went further to say that
communication  technology  is  the  primary  cause  of  social  change


68 Designing for Learner–Content Interaction

underscoring the power technology has in shaping our sociocultural inter-
actions. Gibson (1979) proposed that objects (e.g., technologies) have certain
affordances (capabilities) that lead organisms (e.g., people) to act based on
their perceptions of these affordances. The theory of affordances and
McLuhan’s Media Theory have direct implications on how we understand
the potential of learning technologies and the impact technology has on the
delivery of instructional content and the design of learner-content interac-
tions (Dabbagh, 2004; Dabbagh & Reo, 2011).

For example, the new activities that grew out of Web 2.0 technologies
(e.g., blogging, wikis, creating and posting videos) moved web-based learning
towards a more learner-centered approach. Why? First, Web 2.0 technologies
made it possible for learners to engage in high levels of dialogue, interaction,
collaboration, and social negotiation through the use of social networks and
provided learners with the ability to generate and share knowledge across
learning networks. Second, Web 2.0 technologies deflected control of
learning away from a single instructor or expert by distributing learning
among all participants in the learning community, promoting agency in the
learning process and an appreciation of diversity, multiple perspectives, and
epistemic issues. And third, Web 2.0 technologies enabled learners to per-
sonalize their learning environment by selecting the technologies they wish to
use (e.g., on mobile devices), accessing and organizing information sources,
customizing the user interface of technology, and building personalized
learning and professional networks (Dabbagh & Fake, 2017). These reasons
are  a testimony to McLuhan and Gibson’s principle that technology has the
potential to shape our teaching and learning practices. Rather than treating
media as a delivery vehicle or a transmissive educational technology
(Jonassen, 2002), media should be considered as a key component in the
overall design process.

In order to better understand the affordances of learning technologies and
the role they play in the delivery of instructional content, we provide a clas-
sification (Figure 4.3) that separates the affordances of different classes or types
of technology based on their instructional potential (Dabbagh et al., 2019).

Figure 4.3 shows 6 classes of learning technologies as follows:

1  Technologies for Content Creation and Delivery

2  Technologies for Collaboration and Communication

3  Technologies for Information Search and Resource Management

4  Technologies for Knowledge Representation

5  Technologies for Assessment and Analytics

6  Technologies for Immersive Learning


Designing for Learner–Content Interaction 69

Figure 4.3 6 Classes of Learning Technologies.

Below we discuss the classes of technologies that are most relevant to
designing learner-content interaction and focus on the primary affordances
of these technologies. We also provide examples of use.

Technologies for Content Creation and Delivery

Content creation technologies are primarily used by instructional designers or
instructors to create and manage digital content but they can also be used by
learners to contribute content such as assignments, journals, and resources.
Examples of content creation technologies include tools embedded in Learning
Management Systems (LMS) such as course templates for setting up the course
syllabus and content modules; a repository for content sharing, tagging, and reuse
(e.g., a digital portfolio, wiki spaces); and instructional design tools for creating
flexible learning sequences and designs (e.g., Articulate Storyline, Articulate Rise)
among others. Figure 4.4 below provides a snapshot of these technologies.

When used by learners, content creation and delivery tools can serve as
powerful learning strategies. They enable learners to demonstrate their


70 Designing for Learner–Content Interaction

Figure 4.4 Content Creation and Delivery Tools.

understanding of discipline-specific principles by developing content that
synthesizes their knowledge and engages them in complex individual and
collaborative projects that include interactive multimedia elements such as
audio and video. For example, learners can use Web 2.0 publishing tools and
media-sharing tools that support the creation and sharing of learning content
in a variety of formats such as podcasts and vodcasts.

When used by instructors or instructional designers, content creation and
delivery tools have particular significance for designing learner-content interactions:

•  Content creation and delivery tools have features or affordances that
enable content organization, clarity, and completeness. For example,
content creation and delivery tools have features that support the
grouping of content into pages or modules.

•  Content creation and delivery tools support version control for both
instructors and students so that users can review the presentation and
organization of content to improve its delivery.

•  Content creation and delivery tools have features that support providing
feedback to learners.

•  Content creation and delivery tools have intuitive navigation controls
and a clear dashboard interface.

Although LMSs – e.g., Canvas, Moodle, and Blackboard – are perhaps most
frequently used to create and deliver digital content in higher education and
workplace learning contexts, content can also be created and delivered via
web publishing tools and resource-sharing tools. Table 4.1 shows examples of


Designing for Learner–Content Interaction 71

Table 4.1 Content Creation Tools

LMS-Based Tools        Web Publishing and Resource-
Sharing Tools

Course module creation and display  HTML editors

Course documents to display     Website creation engines/content

management systems (e.g.,
Weebly, Wix, WordPress)

Announcements          Social bookmarking tools (e.g.,
Pearltrees, Diigo, Delicious)


Assignment creation and
management

Shared content areas where students
as well as designers and instructors
may upload content (e.g., course
wikis or digital dropbox)

Course navigation tools (e.g., menu
structures)

Mashups that allow insertion of web-
based materials (e.g., videos)
external to the LMS to be presented

Cloud-based document sharing
(e.g., Google Drive)

Audio and video creation and
editing tools (e.g., ScreenFlow,
Camtasia)

Video and photo sharing (e.g.,
YouTube, Vimeo, Flickr)

e-Learning content creation tools
(e.g., Captivate, Articulate
Storyline, Articulate Rise)

content creation tools categorized as either LMS-based or web publishing
and resources sharing tools.

While Table 4.1 presents LMS and web publishing tools separately as they
do represent two distinct types of tools but are not necessarily exclusive of
one another. LMS developers have recognized that the direct integration of
web-based content into LMS-created content is important for keeping
content current and for making navigation easier for the end user. Figure 4.5

Figure 4.5 Example of Embedded Video in Canvas Course Site.


72 Designing for Learner–Content Interaction

shows an example of how the LMS Canvas allows designers to include direct
access (with a thumbnail image) to a relevant video.

Technologies for Immersive Learning

Another class of technologies that facilitates learner-content interaction is
immersive technologies (see Figure 4.6). Immersive technologies refer to
technologies used to create a digital environment that allows participants to
be totally “immersed” in the context that the environment represents.
Immersive technologies create virtual experiences or digital spaces that strive
to look and feel like a real-world setting, allowing participants to be “in” or
“immersed in” the experience to the extent possible (Pagano, 2013).
Figure 4.6 below shows examples of immersive learning tools.

Immersive learning environments can be created as either a “classic” im-
mersive reality where the participant may wear goggles or a headset, and
interact with the environment using a joystick or other input device or
controller. The other type of immersive learning is created using flat-screen
technologies. Participants “watch” the flat screen device (e.g., computer,
handheld, television) and interact with the environment via a keyboard,
joystick, mouse, or other input devices. Either type of immersive environ-
ment may allow the participant to create an avatar to represent themselves.

Figure 4.6 Immersive Learning Tools.


Designing for Learner–Content Interaction 73

Simulations, educational games, virtual (3D) reality (VR), augmented reality
(AR), and mixed reality (XR) environments are all examples of immersive
learning environments created using immersive technologies. The immersive
environment would include a 3-dimensional visual experience, audio, and
potentially olfactory stimuli.

As an example, Second Life by Linden Lab, one of the most popular
virtual world environments launched in 2003, continues to be one of the
most utilized 3D learning environments among educators (Reisoğlu et al.,
2017). This open-ended 3D environment allows educators to build learning
environments and house different resources, such as images, videos, and
interactive assets to simulate real-life experiences. Players create avatars
within the Second Life environment and can interact with other players or
the non-playable characters (NPCs) using text or audio. Educators have used
Second Life to encourage students to practice second language acquisition
skills through authentic interactions with native speakers or go on virtual
field trips to different museums in the world (see Figure 4.7).

The number of these immersive learning environments has grown greatly
over the past decade as immersive technologies have become numerous,
easier to use, and predominantly cloud-based, hence not requiring anything
more than a standard keyboard. This means that immersive technologies are

Figure 4.7 The Museum of Computing History in Dalton, Created in Second
Life.


74 Designing for Learner–Content Interaction

appropriate for designing learning experiences that facilitate multiple types of
learner-content interaction. Immersive technologies offer a way to provide
“virtual practice” and to interact in meaningful ways with the content and
help develop different aspects of a problem or skill set. As DeAngelis (2012)
suggests, the “virtual practice” of skills can be as effective, or even more
effective, than real-life practice. Hence, immersive technologies are most
suited for developing learning experiences that focus on demonstrating
performance and skills.

Here are the affordances of immersive learning technologies that
make them both attractive and effective for designing learner-content
interaction:

•  Immersive learning technologies can be used to design learner-content
interactions that target the most common or the most difficult situations
that learners encounter on the job. This may be impossible using real-
world settings for training due to safety, ethical, or resource concerns
(e.g., think about virtual surgical training versus training on limited
availability cadavers or patients).

•  Immersive learning technologies allow for learning-by-doing experi-
ences, as opposed to learners being passive recipients of knowledge
transmission-type learning. Put another way, immersive learning tech-
nologies enable the design of learning activities that center on learners
actually performing the skills, or solving a problem, rather than simply
learning “about” a skill, or “about” problem-solving.

•  Immersive learning technologies can be used to create content at varying
levels of authenticity so as to focus learner attention on the characteristics
that are most important to a learning domain. For example, just as a well-
done line drawing of a human heart can focus attention on the primary
parts of the heart (e.g., aorta, left and right ventricle, etc.), an immersive
environment for developing surgical skills can create animated digital
images that, in the early stages of learning, might simplify the surgical field
a bit to focus learners attention on – for instance – identifying the location
for the first incision, and then identifying how to find the heart within the
chest cavity.

•  Immersive learning technologies can be used to provide learners with
immediate feedback. For instance, a virtual frog dissection environment
can immediately communicate to the learner if they have created the
incision in the correct location or not. And of course, said participant
can simply “reset” their frog and try again!


Designing for Learner–Content Interaction 75

Simulations and Virtual Reality as Immersive
Learning Environments

Simulations are a type of immersive environment that create imitations of
some real thing, state of affairs, or processes. Simulations imitate phenomena
by allowing learners to manipulate key characteristics or variables within a
physical or abstract system. Clearly, the computational capabilities of com-
puters make these possible. The simulation designer builds a model of the
phenomena or processes that enable learners to see how the system works. By
changing variables, learners make predictions about the behavior of the
system.

Simulations are used in a broad range of teaching and training operations.
They vary tremendously in detail and complexity. For instance, flight sim-
ulators that include a physical 3-D mock-up of a cockpit and controls are an
important part of pilot and astronaut training. These simulators can present
complex and dramatic situations that the pilots must deal with. Simulators
that create 2D and even 3D representations are now available to learners and
educators via 3D VR goggles that provide a visual 3D experience to the
wearer, or simply via the powerful graphics available in commonly available
2D displays.

There are hundreds of commercially available educational simulations.
Many exist for medical and nursing applications where practice and the
possibility of mistakes in a real setting are unacceptable or costly (either in
terms of life and death or simply the monetary cost of expensive equipment,
such as an airplane). As mentioned before, one of the advantages of these
types of environments is that tasks where a mistake may be critical, such as
medical procedures, or learning to fly an airplane through emergencies – can
be done virtually without the risk of causing harm.

Games as Immersive Learning Environments

A game is another example of another type of immersive technology-based
learning environment. Just as in a simulation, an immersive game puts the
player into a digitally created world where the player may interact with the
elements of the world (which may include other players). In a game, how-
ever, the interactions are designed to accomplish the goals or objectives of the
game, with the ultimate goal of achieving a winning state. The popularity of
gaming – referring to the playing of digital games that may be cloud-based or
hosted on a personal computer, game console, or mobile device – has grown


76 Designing for Learner–Content Interaction

tremendously in the last decade and those who regularly play digital games
span many generations. A recent survey conducted by the Pew Research
Center in 2017 found that 43% of adults in the United States often or
sometimes play video games on a computer, TV, game console, or mobile
device (Perrin, 2018). Further, the gender split is nearly even with 50% of
men compared to 48% of women reporting ever having played a digital game
(Duggan, 2015).

The use of games for learning has also become significant. Research
indicates that Game-Based Learning (GBL) supports statistically significant
improvements in problem-solving (Akcaoglu & Koehler, 2014), feelings of
self-efficacy (Ke, 2014), and higher levels of motivation, critical thinking,
achievement, and engagement (Robertson & Howells, 2008; Yang & Chang,
2013). Additionally, data from a 2018 poll shows that nearly 80% of teachers
use games and other digital resources for teaching (Games & Learning,
2019). Game usage is not limited to school settings either, as more than 100
Fortune 500 companies are using games for some sort of training activities.
The core reasons that games are attractive as learning tools build upon the
reasons for using immersive environments and include the following:

•  Games can be engaging and intrinsically motivating.

•  Games can increase learner engagement.

•  Games offer a format that is familiar to many learners.

•  Games can engage players in higher-order cognitive learning outcomes
such as problem-solving, analysis, and decision-making.

•  Games can also help develop “soft” skills such as teamwork, planning,
and communication.

Countless “educational” games are being developed for necessary but lower-
level learning outcomes, such as recall/recognition or application skills (e.g.,
Duolingo, for developing new language skills through various recall games).
However, games can also be designed to support more complex learning. We
will provide examples of such games in the last section of this chapter.

Instructional Delivery Modality

Another variable that impacts the design of learner-content interaction is the
modality or synchrony of the instructional delivery which can be described as
synchronous, asynchronous, or bichronous (blended). Synchronous instructional
delivery requires all learners (and the instructor) to be present online at the same


Designing for Learner–Content Interaction 77

time in a scheduled timeframe. Methods or strategies that support synchronous
communication include instant messaging, live chats, video conferencing, and
live broadcasting. Zoom, Microsoft teams, and Skype are among the technologies
that can be used to facilitate synchronous delivery of instructional content.
Figure 4.8 below shows a snapshot of the methods, strategies, and technologies
used to design learner-content interactions for synchronous instructional delivery.
The primary educational benefit of this modality is the ability to engage
learners in live discussions and real-time interactions with the content. Also,
synchronous learning is more impactful in the immediate sense due to the
high social presence and sense of community it can foster. However, there are
also some disadvantages to synchronous learning such as not having access to
high-speed internet and challenges of keeping learners engaged for the entire

duration of the synchronous session.

Asynchronous instructional delivery is when the learners and the teacher
or instructor do not meet online at the same time, rather, the learner in-
teracts with the content and completes the learning tasks at their own pace
and time, or following a specific timeframe. Asynchronous methods or tools
used to design learner-content interactions using this modality include
audio/video recorded lectures, discussion forums, interactive video lessons,
and collaborative wiki spaces where learners can work on projects as teams,
games, and simulations among others. Several technologies can be used to
support the asynchronous learning format, including LMSs such as Moodle
or Canvas as well as the web publishing tools described earlier in this chapter.

Figure 4.8 Synchronous Instructional Delivery.


78 Designing for Learner–Content Interaction

Figure 4.9 Asynchronous Instructional Delivery.

Figure 4.9 shows a snapshot of the methods, strategies, and technologies used
to design learner-to-content interactions for asynchronous instructional
delivery.

Asynchronous learning offers more flexibility, focus (as measured by time
on task), more opportunities to reflect on one’s learning, and is more self-
directed and self-paced. On the other hand, bichronous learning or bi-
chronous instructional delivery is defined as the blending of both asyn-
chronous and synchronous online learning. In this approach, students can
participate in anytime, anywhere learning during the asynchronous parts of
the course or the training, but can also participate in real-time synchronous
activities that support immediacy, community, and real-time audiovisual
communication. Martin, Polly, and Ritzhaupt (2020) contend that the blend
of synchronous and asynchronous online learning potentially reduces some
of the challenges of all synchronous or all asynchronous learning environ-
ments and maximizes the benefits of both of these instructional delivery
modalities. Figure 4.10 shows a snapshot of the methods, strategies, and
technologies used to design learner-to-content interactions for bichronous
instructional delivery.

Additionally, traditional instructor-led training formats and materials can
limit access to educational opportunities. Approaches to teaching and learning
that require students or learners to be in a specific place, at a specific time, and
for a fixed duration, necessarily bound opportunities for interaction. Those


Designing for Learner–Content Interaction 79

Figure 4.10 Bichronous Instructional Delivery.

boundaries can limit the ways in which learners work with both instructors and
peers to solve problems, seek help, or engage deeply with content in and out of
the physical classroom. Similarly, familiar educational resources, such as
textbooks and readings, limit how content can be presented to learners and
how they can process that content. Therefore, it is highly recommended that
institutions of higher education and workplace learning organizations leverage
technology to help learners learn more productively by varying, blending, or
accelerating instructional delivery formats. Packaging course content this way
helps  to minimize cost, maximize accessibility, and accommodate different
learning preferences (Dabbagh et al., 2019).

Specifically, administrators can encourage instructors and instructional
designers to use technology to create blended or flipped courses, in which some
lecture material and other course content are delivered in a synchronous,
asynchronous, or bichronous format. These formats or instructional delivery
modalities may preserve more in-person class time for hands-on and other
experiential activities, group assignments, and individualized instruction,
rather than for lectures. Such formats can also be used to accelerate instruction
by allowing learners to go at their own pace. This, in turn, may accelerate their
completion of a course of study or professional development training.

Technology can also be used to package content in multiple ways that help
learners access and study course or training materials. This is especially true
when the interface is interactive, flexible, and offers multiple ways and times for


80 Designing for Learner–Content Interaction

learners to access the content. Learners’ understanding of course or training
content can be deepened by providing them with digital representations of that
content that help them visualize complex processes. Course interfaces can also
include digital review and study tools, such as podcasts, that provide multiple
ways for learners to access and study course material (Mayer, 2001).

Learning Activities

Traditionally, an instructional designer follows a linear process to design
instruction beginning with some given set of criteria such as the lesson’s
purpose and subject matter, the learners’ general characteristics, and likely
some logistical constraints. From these, designers extrapolate the type (e.g.,
psychomotor, cognitive, affective) and level of learning outcomes (e.g., re-
membering and understanding, applying and understanding), objectives of the
associated assessments (e.g., formative, summative), and other delivery factors
(e.g., course schedule, perhaps). They break the goals into objectives, the
objectives into tasks, and then select some set of instructional strategies to help
learners achieve the learning outcomes. They continue working in this linear
fashion—breaking down the plans into smaller and smaller parts, and carefully
considering the content, delivery, and learner activities for each. This is known
as “backwards design” (Bannan, Dabbagh, & Walcutt, 2019). See Figure 4.11.
Instructional strategies are what instructors, instructional designers, or
instructional systems do to facilitate student learning (Dabbagh et al., 2019).
They are described as “the plans and techniques that the instructor or
instructional designer uses to engage the learner and facilitate learning”

(Jonassen, Grabinger, & Harris, 1991, p. 34).

For example, if the instructional strategy is lecture, learning activities would
include active listening, taking notes, asking questions, reviewing the lecture
after class, and using one’s understanding of the lecture content to complete an
assignment or take a test. Alternatively, if the instructional strategy is problem-
solving, associated learning activities would include generating and testing a

Figure 4.11 Backwards Design Process.


Designing for Learner–Content Interaction 81

hypothesis, identifying learning needs to better understand the problem at
hand, and determining an action plan to seek appropriate information and
resources that would help formulate a solution to the problem. Learning
activities are the fourth variable that impacts the design of learner-content
interaction. We discuss learning activities in this last section of the chapter and
provide examples of how technology can be used to support the design of
learning activities that engage learners with the content.

Let’s discuss learning activities that engage learners with the content at low and
high levels of Bloom’s taxonomy. Specifically, the instructional strategy of pro-
viding practice to facilitate recall, long-term retention, and skill building, which
aligns with the lower levels of Bloom’s taxonomy (recall, understanding, and
application) can be implemented through the use of casual games. Casual games
are a learning technology that support the design of structured activities with
simple rules and goals (Gee, 2007). Examples of casual games include puzzles,
word games, hidden object games, and strategy games. Casual games are an
appropriate digital technology for providing practice. Research shows that casual
games allow players to achieve mastery through repeated trial and error attempts
(Gee, 2007), try new skills without fear of failure (Gredler, 1996), and support
the development of key learning skills such as cognitive processing, logical
thinking, and independent decision making (Prensky, 2001). Casual games can
be played on a computer, in a browser, or on a smartphone as mobile apps.

Lumosity is an example of a casual game designed to improve brain health
and performance through rehearsal and practice. Providing practice can also
be supported through embedded questions in a self-paced PPT presentation
or an e-learning module prompting learners to practice their knowledge and
understanding through knowledge checks. Digital audio and video playback
simulations that model accurate performance and provide personalized
feedback can also be used as a technology for providing practice (Arias &
Herbert, 2015). Duolingo is an example of an instructional system that uses
audio and video playback to provide practice for language learning.

Alternatively, the instructional strategy of problem-solving, which aligns
with the higher levels of Bloom’s taxonomy (analysis, evaluation, creation),
can be implemented using 3D virtual worlds which is a technology that
provides an immersive space for learners to explore, experiment, collaborate,
communicate, and create (Downes, 2010; Good, Howland, & Thackray,
2008; Hew & Cheung, 2010). Problem-solving activities can also be facili-
tated through Learning Management Systems (LMS), specifically through
the use of discussion, resources, and synchronous and asynchronous col-
laborative features (Livingstone, Kemp, & Edgar, 2008).


82 Designing for Learner–Content Interaction

Use Case Example of Learner-Content Interaction
Using Immersive Technologies

As an example, iCivics, founded by Justice Sandra Day O’Connor in 2009, is
a series of topic-specific serious games that provides learners with knowledge
and practices of government and civic duty as a citizen of the United States.
Serious games are defined as games designed for the primary reason of
training and education beyond the context of entertainment (Allbeck, 2010;
Djaouti et al., 2016; Lugmayr et al., 2016). The iCivics website contains
over 16 serious games that cover a variety of topics, such as Argument Wars,
where players assume the role of the lawyer of influential cases decided in the
Supreme Court, or Do I Have a Right? (Figure 4.12), where the player
assumes the role of a lawyer who needs to decide if potential clients may or
may not have their constitutional rights violated, just to name a few.

The immersive learning environment includes animations, audio, and
decision-driven responses from non-playable characters. In the environment,
learners work on higher-order thinking skills and build their knowledge on the
topic at hand, whether it is case laws or constitutional rights. Additionally, key
vocabulary terms are bolded throughout the game’s texts. When the player
selects the vocabulary, its definition is displayed to help learners focus on the
simulation while providing necessary information to aid players’ learning.

Figure 4.12 iCivics Argument Wars Screenshot.


Designing for Learner–Content Interaction 83

Use Case Example of Learner-Content Interaction
Using an LMS and GBL

In 2013, the Center for Distance and Online Learning (CDOL) at the Los
Angeles County Office of Education (LACOE), as part of the California
K-12 Student Mental Health Initiative grant provided by the Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), developed a
series of self-paced online courses to provide educators with evidence-based
suicide prevention and other related students mental well-being program.
For suicide prevention, three 4-hour online courses were developed, one each for
teachers, administrators, and school mental health professionals, respectively.

The original target audience was pre-service teachers, administrators, and
school mental health professionals, which include nurses, counselors, and school
psychologists, and were aimed to provide foundational knowledge of warning
signs and risk factors that educators should be aware of and best practices in
speaking with students in order to refer them to the correct professionals to
intervene with any suicidal ideations. At its inception, the course was designed for
both standalone and blended use in a teacher-preparation university classroom.
The course was developed using Moodle as its initial Learning Management
System (LMS) and included text, decorative, relational, and organizational gra-
phics, and videos. The text was written in a conversational tone, with sections of
brief pauses to allow learners to reflect on the content. As a collaboration between
Los Angeles and Placer County, an added feature of a serious game was included.
The Placer County Office of Education provided the use of the Kognito Suicide
Prevention for High School Educators (now renamed as Emotional & Mental
Wellness for Educators & Staff) serious game to be integrated as a final assess-
ment within LACOE’s suicide prevention online courses.

To broaden its reach, LACOE collaborated with California State
University, Los Angeles (CSULA), one of the largest educator training
universities in Los Angeles County, and provided the suicide prevention
course modules to the faculty of CSULA to be integrated into existing
university courses that were part of the credential training programs for
teachers, administrators, and school mental health professionals. To assist
faculty in using the online courses, an additional user guide was developed to
include usage models, samples (asynchronous as self-study for students or
blended use both online and offline,) technical assistance, and discussion
prompts that faculty can use in class.

Within one year of its pilot, over 2000 CSULA teachers, administrators,
and student mental health professional students have completed the suicide
prevention online courses. In a focus group, students expressed that the


84 Designing for Learner–Content Interaction

combination of traditional online course delivery methods (text, graphics,
videos, etc.) and the Kognito serious game reinforced the learning of the
content. They also stated that the practicality of the content delivery method
prepared them to work with students and be cognizant of potential suicide
risk factors and warning signs. Over 60% of the pre-service teachers inter-
viewed expressed that they feel more confident knowing what to do (referring
students to administrators and school mental professionals) should they
observe warning signs in students.

References

Akcaoglu, M., & Koehler, M. J. (2014). Cognitive outcomes from the game-design and
learning (GDL) after-school program. Computers & Education, 75, 72–81. 10.1016/
j.compedu.2014.02.003.

Allbeck, J. (2010). Serious games. Games and Intelligent Animation. Retrieved October
31, 2022, from https://cs.gmu.edu/~gaia/SeriousGames/index.html.

Arias, B., & Herbert, P. (2015, June 12). Case study: Audio and video feedback. University of
Bristol - Digital Education Office. Retrieved November 3, 2022, from http://www.bristol.
ac.uk/digital-education/case-studies/pre-2018/audio-and-video-feedback-using-mdr/.

Bannan, B., Dabbagh, N., & Walcutt, J. J. (2019). Instructional strategies for the future.
In J. J. Walcutt and S. Schatz (Eds.), Modernizing learning: Building the future learning
ecosystem (pp. 223–242). Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office. License:
Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 4.0 IGO.

Bonwell, C. C., & Eison, J. A. (1991). Active learning: Creating excitement in the classroom.

School of Education and Human Development, George Washington University.

Bower, M. (2017). Design of technology-enhanced learning: Integrating research and practice.

Emerald Publishing Limited.

Clark, R. C., & Mayer, R. E. (2011). E-learning and the science of instruction: Proven
guidelines for consumers and designers of multimedia learning. Pfeiffer.

Dabbagh, N. (2004). Distance learning: Emerging pedagogical issues and learning
designs. Quarterly Review of Distance Education, 5(1), 37.

Dabbagh, N., Bass, R., Bishop, M., Costelloe, S., Cummings, K., Freeman, B., Frye, M.,
Picciano, A. G., Porowski, A., Sparrow, J., & Wilson, S. J. (2019). Using technology to
support postsecondary student learning: A practice guide for college and university adminis-
trators, advisors, and faculty. Washington, DC: Institute of Education Sciences, What
Works Clearinghouse. (WWC 20090001) Washington, DC: National Center for
Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance (NCEE), Institute of Education Sciences,

U.S. Department of Education. https://ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/PracticeGuide/25.
Dabbagh, N., & Fake, H. (2017). College students’ perceptions of Personal Learning

Environments (PLEs) through the lens of digital tools, processes, and spaces. Journal of
New Approaches in Educational Research, 6(1), 28–36. 10.7821/naer.2017.1.215.

Dabbagh, N., Howland, J., & Marra, R. (2019). Meaningful online learning: Integrating
strategies, activities, and learning technologies for effective designs. New York, N.Y.:
Routledge.


Designing for Learner–Content Interaction 85

Dabbagh, N., & Reo, R. (2011). Impact of Web 2.0 on higher education. In Technology
integration in higher education: Social and organizational aspects (pp. 174–187). IGI Global.
DeAngelis, C. (2012). The Integration of Technology in the Twenty-First Century

Composition Classroom (Doctoral dissertation, Kent State University).

Djaouti, D., Alvarez, J., & Jessel, J.-P. (2016). Classifying serious games. Advances in
Game-Based Learning, 118–136. 10.4018/978-1-60960-495-0.ch006.

Downes, S. (2010). Learning Networks and Connective Knowledge. In H. Hao Yang and

S. Chi-Yin Yuen (eds.), Collective Intelligence and E-Learning 2.0: Implications of Web-
Based Communities and Networking. IGI Global.

Duggan, M. (2015, May 30). Gaming and gamers. Pew Research Center: Internet, Science
& Tech. Retrieved November 3, 2022, from https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/
2015/12/15/gaming-and-gamers/.

Fake, H. (2018). A delphi study on the dimensions of personalized learning in workforce
training and development programs. [Doctoral dissertation, George Mason University].
Proquest.

Games and Learning. (2019). Digital games, tools move towards core of classroom. Retrieved
November 3, 2022, from https://www.gamesandlearning.org/2019/06/16/digital-
games-tools-move-towards-core-of-classroom/.

Gee, J. P. (2007). Good video games + good learning: Collected essays on video games,
learning, and literacy. Peter Lang.

Gibson, J. J. (1979). The theory of affordances. In The people, place, and space reader

(pp. 90–94). Routledge.

Good, J., Howland, K., & Thackray, L. (2008). Problem-based learning spanning real
and virtual words: A case study in second life. Research in Learning Technology, 16(3).
10.3402/rlt.v16i3.10895.

Gredler, M. E. (1996). Educational games and simulations: A technology in search of a
(research) paradigm. Technology, 39, 521–540.

Hew, K. F., & Cheung, W. S. (2010). Use of three-dimensional (3-D) immersive virtual
worlds in K-12 and higher education settings: A review of the research. British Journal
of Educational Technology, 41(1), 33–55. 10.1111/j.1467-8535.2008.00900.x.

Hodges, C., Moore, S., Lockee, B., Trust, T., & Bond, A. (2020, March 27). The dif-
ference between emergency remote teaching and online learning. EDUCAUSE. Retrieved
October 29, 2022, from https://er.educause.edu/articles/2020/3/the-difference-
between-emergency-remote-teaching-and-online-learning.

Jonassen, D. H. (2002) Learning to solve problems online. In C. Vrasidas and G. Glass
(Eds.), Distance education and distance learning (pp. 75–98). Greenwich, CT:
Information Age Publishing.

Jonassen, D. H., Grabinger, R. S., & Harris, N. D. (1991). Analyzing and selecting
instructional strategies and tactics. Performance Improvement Quarterly, 4(2), 77–97.
10.1111/j.1937-8327.1997.tb00029.x.

Kalyuga, S. (2005). Prior knowledge principle in multimedia learning. In R. E. Mayer
(Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning (pp. 325–337). New York:
Cambridge University Press.

Kalyuga, S., Ayres, P., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (2003). Expertise reversal effect.

Educational Psychologist, 38, 23–31.

Ke, F. (2014). An implementation of design-based learning through creating educational


86 Designing for Learner–Content Interaction

computer games: A case study on mathematics learning during design and computing.

Computers & Education, 73, 26–39. 10.1016/j.compedu.2013.12.010.

Livingstone, D., Kemp, J., & Edgar, E. (2008). From multi-user virtual environment to
3D virtual learning environment. Research in Learning Technology, 16(3). 10.3402/
rlt.v16i3.10893.

Lugmayr, A., Suhonen, J., Hlavacs, H., Montero, C., Suutinen, E., & Sedano, C. (2016).
Serious storytelling - a first definition and review. Multimedia Tools and Applications,
76(14), 15707–15733. doi: 10.1007/s11042-016-3865-5.

Martin, F., Polly, D., & Ritzhaupt, A. (2020, September 8). Bichronous online learning:
Blending asynchronous and synchronous online learning. EDUCAUSE. Retrieved
October 29, 2022, from https://er.educause.edu/articles/2020/9/bichronous-online-
learning-blending-asynchronous-and-synchronous-online-learning.

Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia learning. Cambridge Univ. Press.

Mayer, R. E., & Gallini, J. K. (1990). When is an illustration worth ten thousand words?

Journal of Educational Psychology, 88, 64–73.

Pagano, K. O. (2013). Immersive learning. Association for Talent Development.

Perrin, A. (2018, September 17). 5 facts about Americans and video games. Pew Research
Center. Retrieved October 29, 2022, from https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/
2018/09/17/5-facts-about-americans-and-video-games/.

Prensky, M. (2001). The games generations; how learners have changed. Digital Game-
based Learning, 1(1), 1–26.

Reisoğlu, I., Topu, B., Yılmaz, R., Karakuş Yılmaz, T., & Göktaş, Y. (2017). 3D virtual
learning environments in education: A Meta-Review. Asia Pacific Education Review,
18(1), 81–100. 10.1007/s12564-016-9467-0.

Robertson, J., & Howells, C. (2008). Computer game design: Opportunities for suc-
cessful learning. Computers & Education, 50(2), 559–578. 10.1016/j.compedu.2
007.09.020.

Swerdloff, M. (2016). Online learning, multimedia, and emotions. In S. Y. Tettegah and

M. P. McCreery (Eds.), Emotions, technology, and learning (pp. 155–175). essay,
Academic Press.

Yang, Y.-T. C., & Chang, C.-H. (2013). Empowering students through digital game
authorship: Enhancing concentration, critical thinking, and academic achievement.
Computers & Education, 68, 334–344. 10.1016/j.compedu.2013.05.023.


Designing for          5

Learner–Learner

Interaction

Figure 5.0 Learner-Learner Interaction.

Whether you call it “peer mentoring”, “peer tutoring”, “peer learning”, peer-
to-peer learning, or learner-to-learner interaction, research suggests that
designing opportunities for individuals to learn from other individual
learners can empower the development of metacognition, collaborative
learning, interpersonal skills, communication, as well as a multitude of other

DOI: 10.4324/9781003121008-5


88 Designing for Learner–Learner Interaction

21st-century skills (Andrews & Manning, 2016; Carvalho & Santos, 2022;
Sampson, Boud, Cohen, Gaynor, 1999; Zamberlan & Wilson, 2015). As
defined by The Pennsylvania State University (2022), “Peer learning is a
form of active, cooperative learning … . built off of the role of social
interaction (discussion or dialogue) … [Peer learning] takes it one step
further and places the student in the role of being a peer teacher, either
formally or informally”. Boud, Cohen, and Sampson (2001) focus on the
reciprocal nature of the learning activity which involves the, “[shared]
knowledge, ideas, and experiences between the participants” (p. 3). The shift
towards learners as creators and constructors of knowledge rather than pas-
sive recipients also makes the development of peer programs an important
scaffolding construct as learners gain a sense of proficiency and confidence in
a safer individualized space with other individual learners (Duus & Cooray,
2022). It should be noted that we will use peer-to-peer and learner-to-learner
interaction interchangeably in this chapter.

Differences Between Learner to Learner and Other
PLiF Interaction Types

Before we go much further, we must make a distinction between the learner-
to-learner interaction and learner-to-coach and/or mentorship interaction.
While the learner-to-learner interaction is similar to a learner-to-coach or
mentorship interaction in that it is individualized or a 1:1 engagement as
mentioned in Chapter 3, the differences emerge when we consider the
interaction between learners as involving equals or learners at the same level
of proficiency (Boud et al., 2001; Zamberlan & Wilson, 2015). This
interaction differs from learner-coach and learner-mentor interaction since
coaches and mentors are not equals to the learner, but rather experts that
support the learner from a position of authority and often one of power. In a
learner-to-learner interaction, however, the individuals involved lack any
influence, position, or power over one another. The lack of a power dynamic
allows the learners to explore ideas, make mistakes, and confide in each
other. The operating assumption within this interaction is that the learner
will be more likely to relate and trust someone who is in the same situation
compared to others who may come from a different perspective, level of
expertise, or rank (Rabinowitz, 2022). A benefit of learner-learner or peer-
peer interaction is that learners may be more likely to ask questions of a peer
they view as an equal as opposed to others they perceive as having more
expertise or authority.


Designing for Learner–Learner Interaction 89

It is also important to note there may be considerable overlap with the
learner-to-small group interaction dimension of the PLiF. The difference
between these two dimensions, as defined in this book, is that in a learner-to-
learner interaction, participants learn from one another. The learner-to-small
group interaction, however, may be better suited to tasks wherein groups
pursue new learning alongside each other. We explore the advantages and
disadvantages of each approach in the paragraphs below.

In a learner-to-learner interaction, the influence of group dynamics is less
pronounced compared to the learner to small group interaction (Marjolaine
et al., 2020). Without having to form, storm, norm, and perform, the dyad is
allowed to develop an interpersonal relationship that is not privy to the same
forces that may be at play within a larger cooperative learning setting
(Tuckman, 1965). The individualized nature of the relationship allows
students to share their ideas in a safer space without the considerations of
power dynamics or judgment associated with exploring new topics or ideas.
This, in turn, supports learners in speaking more freely while testing out
ideas prior to sharing with a larger audience.

Learner-to-small group interactions, however, may be useful in supporting
the learners’ socialization skills. Much of being successful in the workforce
entails knowledge of how to effectively operate and function in small groups
or teams (Fisher & Phillips, 2021; Haas & Mortensen, 2016). Therefore,
facilitating and enabling exposure to this type of interaction will encourage
the development of relational skill sets that are critical to accomplishing
important project-based tasks.

Group dynamics present in a learner-to-small group interaction may also
contribute to conformity and groupthink. Influential German sociologist
Georg Simmel, wrote extensively on the effects group size had on attitude and
behavior noting that a group of three represented more threat to the loss of
independence, isolation, and segmentation compared to a dyad (Simmel,
1950). Therefore, intentional thought around how to organize and structure
group work is necessary to support productive interactions between learners.
Ultimately, the learner-to-learner interaction taps into the experiences
and expertise of the participants. As Knowles (1984) emphasized, adult
learners contain a depth of expertise and knowledge. From an organiza-
tional standpoint, employee experiences and knowledge are a tremendous
asset to the classroom and to their organizations. In business, workers may
benefit from speaking with employees in other departments, breaking
down organizational silos with others who have an in-depth knowledge of
their operational context (Palmer & Blake, 2018). Knowledge of the
organization’s goals, opportunities, limitations, constraints, technologies,


90 Designing for Learner–Learner Interaction

people, and processes is a tremendous asset in collaboratively investigating
solutions to identified organizational problems. Students in academic sit-
uations involved in a learner to learner interaction may also have more
opportunities to explore ideas before presenting them to a larger group or
test   out and experiment with ideas prior to being in more formal en-
vironments (Centre for Teaching and Learning, 2021).

Designing for Learner-to-Learner Interaction

Sampson et al. (1999) advocated that defining the context clearly is
important when considering the implementation of peer learning or the
learner-to-learner interaction. Where the learner-to-learner interaction takes
place, the nature of the implementation, and the ways in which teaching and
learning are practiced all emerged as important factors for consideration. In
the remainder of this chapter, we will consider each of the best practices in
spaces wherein one can set up the learner-to-learner interaction, first by
identifying the learning needs and objectives, defining where the learner-to-
learner interaction might happen, how to facilitate the learner to learner
selection process, categorical types of learner-to-learner interaction, potential
learner to learner activities, technologies that enable learner-to-learner
interaction, as well as potential considerations of when learner to learner
interaction might be an effective mode of instruction.

It is important to note that many organizational and cultural elements are
necessary to set the preconditions of any training and development program
given the vulnerability needed to share stories, admit mistakes, and brain-
storm new solutions. Creating an effective organizational learning culture
where vulnerability and learning are encouraged is a well-trodden path and
goes outside the scope of this book. For those looking for resources about
creating a learning culture, please reference the additional reading section of
this chapter.

Defining Learning Needs and Instructional
Objectives

As with any interaction, the intentional consideration of a learner-to-learner
interaction’s design will be important to the effectiveness of its use within the
classroom or organizational environment. Therefore, to begin, we must
consider why we are leveraging this interaction in the first place.


Designing for Learner–Learner Interaction 91

The learner-to-learner interaction is best used when exploring conceptual
problems or case studies, or in learning situations wherein individuals need
to apply and discuss the key concepts, principles, or theories associated with a
new domain (Centre for Teaching & Learning, 2021). For example, in an
academic setting, a learner-to-learner interaction could involve two statistics
students meeting to go over a homework assignment and complete a
problem set. In Workforce Training and Development, learner-to-learner
interaction might involve programmers reviewing each other’s code before
deploying the changes to the website they work on or even two coworkers
using a “working session” to investigate a new software solution to see if the
available options serve their needs. The different types of work represented
here flavor how one might design these interactions. For example, within
higher education, the academic setting is potentially more formalized based
on curricular and academic requirements. Therefore, the types of objectives
may be more structured. In Workforce Education, however, the learning
objectives may need to focus more so on projects or business objectives which
may constantly evolve and change. These experiences therefore may be less
structured and tangentially translate to skill development.

Providing opportunities for peer feedback is yet another facet of the
learner-to-learner interaction that offers workers and students opportunities
to enhance their skill sets while practicing interpersonal communication and
critical thinking skills (Zamberlan & Wilson, 2015). Leveraging feedback
from students or workers may even help scale limited professorial or training
resources within massive open online communities (MOOCs) and create a
sense of belonging in online learning environments to address complaints
wherein students may feel alone in their learning process (Kulkarni, Kotturi,
Bernstein, & Klemmer, 2016).

Where Learner to Learner Interaction Occurs

According to experts in this work’s foundational study, personalized learning
can occur almost anywhere. The formal classroom was rejected as a space for
personalized learning, but this might be a reflection of the current passive
pedagogical practices inherent in the traditional classroom. This transfer-
ability and flexibility of location can also be said about the learner-to-learner
interaction. The learner-to-learner interaction may happen in person, in
blended work or learning situations, and even in fully remote contexts.
Operationally, the current work or classroom set-up may dictate what works
best for students and workers. For example, an on-campus student body or


92 Designing for Learner–Learner Interaction

workers situated in the same location may be able to leverage in person or
hybrid approaches to the learner-to-learner interaction (e.g., with hybrid
approaches incorporating both in person and virtual touchpoints for the
learner-to-learner interaction). Geographically distributed student bodies of
workforces, however, may need to focus primarily on virtual interaction with
occasional in-person touchpoints if economically feasible.

Asynchronous and synchronous modalities are yet another set of variables
to consider in the development of learner-to-learner interaction. Kulkarni
et al. (2016) investigated the impact that asynchronous and synchronous
learner-to-learner interaction had on student essays and learning outcomes
using   two peer learning software tools PeerStudio and Talkabout. PeerStudio
was an asynchronous rapid essay assessment platform and Talkabout,
prompted synchronous student conversations in Google Hangouts on course
materials. In Talkabout, learners could meet with a peer to discuss important
course topics and reflect on assigned content. The other software,
PeerStudio, asked users to asynchronously “grade” peer essays based on a
provided rubric with a few open-ended comments fields. The researchers
found that rapid iterative feedback to students who submitted essays through
the PeerStudio interface improved the final grades significantly, increased the
speed of feedback, and supported teachers in scaling their courses to larger
numbers of students, particularly in MOOCs.

The researchers leveraging PeerStudio and Talkabout for the learner-to-
learner interaction found that the instructors’ prompting was particularly
important to encourage the use of these learner-to-learner interaction tech-
nologies. These findings suggest that setting expectations regarding the use of
available tools, therefore, will be an important aspect of any learner-to-
learner interaction. Another challenge cited in this study associated with
remote learner-to-learner interaction was the lack of ambient student en-
gagement and energy often found in a face-to-face classroom. Designers,
thus, may consider incentivizing or making opportunities for learners to
interact, collaborate, and celebrate their interdependence, set positive com-
munity norms, and structure ongoing interactions between peers. A large
number of participants also made it difficult for instructors to observe the
interactions between peers within the peer learning systems. Professors
shared that the rich contextual data provided by students was hard to parse
through, and little visibility beyond engagement was available for instructors
to understand areas wherein students were struggling in the PeerStudio and
Talkabout platforms. It was difficult for faculty to ascertain where students
were struggling with the learning content. Future iterations to the existing
platforms may consider leveraging existing engagement metrics (e.g., number


Designing for Learner–Learner Interaction 93

of average conversations over time, natural language processing sentiment
analysis, time to task completion, etc.) as well as student interviews, course
feedback, and other research methodologies to bring these areas to light.

Facilitating the Learner to Learner Interaction
Selection Process

The learner-to-learner interaction may be set up in a variety of ways, including
self-selected, topic or project-based, rotated, or computer automated. Each
approach may be better suited for different learning environments than others.
We explore the design implications of each approach in the paragraphs below.
Self-selection has been shown to have advantages and disadvantages in the
learning and development process (Centre for Teaching and Learning, 2021).
One potentially obvious advantage of self-selection stems from the ownership
the learner has in their selection of a partner. Conversely, students or learners
may be attracted to pair with someone of the same ethnic group or with
another individual wherein they perceive a sense of comfort and familiarity. As
a consequence learners may avoid anyone that seems different (Centre for
Teaching and Learning, 2021). Therefore, building inclusivity is an important
design consideration when developing peer-to-peer programs. Essentially, it is
important to design learner-to-learner programs that are diverse across several
dimensions to include inherent diversity (e.g., age, gender, ethnicity, sexual
diversity, etc.) and acquired diversity (e.g., different skill sets, roles, life ex-
periences, etc.) (Hewlitt, Marshall & Sherbin, 2013). One way to support self-
selective pairing may be asking students to select a few different peers they
think might be good to work with and encouraging learners to consider the

value of pairing with someone who may have a different perspective.

A self-selection approach may work best when students have direct contact
with and can get to know one another over time. Setting up opportunities to
meet one another may support facilitating this self-selection process.

While much of project-based learning tends to be in small groups of 3–7,
the dyad may be useful in instances of peer review (Pozzi et al., 2016). In an
analysis of interactions between dyads and groups conducting peer reviews in
a Moodle course, Pozzi et al. (2016) found that dyads as well as course tutors
helping dyads tended to be more actively engaged. In peer review sessions,
dyads sent 139 messages on average compared to 42 messages between
students in groups. Overall, this research suggests the dyads supported higher
levels of cognition, individual knowledge building, and frequency of dia-
logue. There were even higher observed rates of cohesion and affection


94 Designing for Learner–Learner Interaction

between analyzed comments in dyads compared to groups. Topic or
project-based peer selection, therefore, may be best suited for instances
wherein a pair will work together based on a shared interest, project, or peer
review. In this situation, the project or topic should dictate the pairing more
so than any preconceived notions of affinity between peers. In this model of
peer selection, learners must be able to either share or post a project idea and
solicit connections based on the ideas.

This approach to peer selection seeks to minimize the learners’ pre-
conceived notions of affinity and encourage the learner to take ownership of
the problem space. At the same time, this type of selection process may also
be susceptible to the disadvantages of the self-selection process if learners
select tasks based on the other learners as opposed to the task. Anonymity of
the learner proposing the task may be one tactic to control this behavior.

Rotated selection is yet another way to enable learner-to-learner inter-
action. In this model, learners are paired up for a defined amount of time and
then later rotated to a new peer upon completion of a learning task, learning
unit, or defined deliverable. This may give the learner exposure to a multi-
tude of viewpoints. The tradeoff, however, is that learners may not be able to
sustain or form longer-term peer-to-peer relationships this way.

Computer-automated learner-to-learner interaction may introduce learners
to one another based on defined parameters. These parameters may be defined
based on a multitude of variables explicit (defined by the user), implicit (defined
by the user’s interaction with the system), or a mix of both explicit and implicit
data sources. Examples of data sources could include learner-defined data (e.g.,
learner preferences, personalized learning plans, learner goals, desired learning
activities, learner profiles, espoused interests), behaviorally defined data
(implicitly defined interests, information consumption behaviors, learner pat-
terns, navigation preferences, behavioral logs, or perceived motivational level),
contextually defined data (e.g., location, time, organizational role, type of task,
language, instructor input), relationship-driven data (e.g., content relationships
or community relationships), or even performance data (e.g., learner perform-
ance, existing expertise/prior mastery, completions, academic outcomes, self-
report metrics, levels of proficiency) (Fake, 2018). Other parameters that previous
researchers have considered include espoused media preference, learner cognitive
styles, biometrics or neurological data, satisfaction, length of training activity, or
promotion or position changes, however, experts previously have not acknowl-
edged these data sources as supporting personalized learning. Therefore, if using
computer automated systems to facilitate the learner to learner interaction,
considering the aforementioned types of data sources may support connecting
two students or workers depending on a variety of metadata surrounding their


Designing for Learner–Learner Interaction 95

interests, behaviors, contexts, attributes, connections, or performance, potentially
identify peer matches that may have not have formed otherwise.

This approach may make the most sense when needing to pair learners in a
larger ecosystem. Leveraging the explicit and implicit data may support pairing
users at scale given the big data and analytics capabilities that may be required
to form pairs. Therefore, this approach might be best suited to learning eco-
systems that need to prioritize scale like MOOCs or large organizations.

With the design considerations associated with pairing outlined, we
continue with a discussion regarding the five different types of peer-to-peer
or learner-to-learner interaction.

Categories of Peer Learning in Learner-to-Learner
Interaction

The Centre for Learning Excellence (2021) and Gilbert, Hunsaker, and
Schmidt (2007) identified five different categorical types of learner-to-learner
and learner-to-small group interaction. According to the paper, these include
Peer Interaction (which is a categorical type of learner-to-learn interaction
as defined in the paper and not to be confused with the overarching inter-
action we are speaking about in this book), Peer Response, Peer
Collaboration, Peer Feedback, and Peer Facilitation. Since this chapter
focuses on the learner to learner interaction, we will explore the two cate-
gorical types that are more aligned with an individualized interaction
approach, including Peer Interaction and Peer Feedback. The other types
of learner engagements will be revisited (e.g., Peer Response, Peer
Collaboration, and Peer Facilitation) in Chapter 6 where we will explore the
design considerations of the learner-to-small group interaction.

According to the categorical types outlined in the research, Peer Interaction
involves students brainstorming and discussing course topics with one another
without the assistance of faculty or ISDs. These interactions are great for helping
the students assess their understanding prior to introducing new content, pro-
viding opportunities for reflection, and offering opportunities to socialize.

The other type of peer learning, Peer Feedback gains an important role
throughout the learner-to-learner interaction, so it is no surprise that many
groups have sought to understand best practices in how to structure peer
feedback (Gielen & De Wever, 2015; Klassen, 2004; Lopez-Pellisa, Rotger,
Rodriguez–Gallego, 2021; Oosta & Hoatlin, 2015). When feedback is used,
how it is structured, the number of reviewers, and whether or not the re-
viewers are anonymous are all items of consideration when designing peer


96 Designing for Learner–Learner Interaction

feedback activities (Centre for Teaching and Learning, 2022). Please note,
peer feedback may also be used in small group interactions and we note
where the different activities could be leveraged in both use cases.

Instructing learners on mechanisms of providing constructive feedback may
be critical to enabling impactful learner-to-learner interaction. In interviews and
analysis of over 300 learner-to-learner feedback letters, Oosta & Hoatlin (2015)
note that peer feedback can often be reactionary, negative, or vague which
suggests that instructors must dedicate time and resources to encourage the
development of effective feedback skills which underpin this approach. For
example, the researchers found that rubrics can be helpful in strengthening
feedback conversations. Having a set benchmark helps focus the conversation
and provides learners the opportunity to understand the aims of the assignment
and how the worked example achieves (or doesn’t achieve) that aim. In eval-
uating the impact of structured versus unstructured peer feedback, Gielen and
De Wever (2015) discovered structure translated into higher quality peer
feedback which increased deliverable alignment with defined criteria. This
research suggests that the more forethought we place into conceiving the goals
and roles of peer feedback or work to create systems and rubrics to support
these types of sessions, the more likely we can guide the learner to the learning
moments we hope to cultivate through our instructional experiences.

Klassen (2004) helps further differentiate between types of feedback that
may be useful to writers with classifications to include the red pen or editing,
correcting, or fixing someone’s work, the back pat or praise of the writer’s
efforts, analysis, or an interpretation of the deeper meaning suggested by the
work, seed gathering or sharing what works well from the reader’s per-
spective, and power notes or indications of the personal impact the writing
has had on one’s experiences. Defining these types of feedback may be
helpful to learners as they consider the best ways to structure their reactions
and comments on others’ work.

Earlier in this chapter, we spoke of the considerable overlap between a
learner-to-learner and learner-to-small group interaction. Therefore, many of
the activities shown below may be adjusted to support the learner in small group
interaction. To support the development of the PLIF, however, both interac-
tions (e.g., learner-to-learner and learner-to-small group) must be present in
order to create the self-sustaining learning framework proposed in this book.

The activities below represent different ways to structure the learner-to-learner
interaction types in asynchronous, synchronous, or bichronous learning en-
vironments. It is important to note that each approach may influence what
technologies are used to facilitate these interactions. In parenthesis, we’ve
included what type of peer learning is supported in each activity (Table 5.1).


Designing for Learner–Learner Interaction 97


98 Designing for Learner–Learner Interaction


Designing for Learner–Learner Interaction 99

Technologies that Enable Learner-to-Learner
Interaction

The technological classifications described in Chapter 4, map well to the
learner-to-learner interaction. The most common technologies that support
learner-to-learner interaction include collaboration and communication
tools, content creation tools, and assessment tools (Dabbagh et al., 2019)
(Figure 5.1).

The table below represents the technologies used to teach a Business
Analytics course to a midsize company in the Mid-Atlantic as well as tools an
institute of higher education might leverage to enable similar interactions
(Table 5.2).

Figure 5.1 Technology Categories.


100 Designing for Learner–Learner Interaction


Designing for Learner–Learner Interaction 101

When to Implement Learner-to-Learner Interaction

When designing the learner-to-learner interaction, it may also be appropriate to
consider when might be best to prioritize providing these opportunities. In the
following paragraphs, we will explore different points in the learner journey
including during student or employee onboarding, during performance eva-
luations, and even design implications for providing learner-to-learner inter-
action throughout their experiences with their respective organization.

During Onboarding or Orientation

A common complaint during onboarding is the sense of vulnerability that
stems from being new and needing to ask one’s supervisor questions about
the operational or academic environment (Baker, 2020). Struggling to
connect with other workers when starting at a new organization has been
further complicated by COVID, the mass resignation, and the move towards
a more remote workforce (Naji, 2022). In a virtual space, “watercooler
moments” have to be carefully constructed and may be limited by our
current technologies that have less flexibility in cultivating the range of in-
teractions between peers that may happen in a face-to-face context.

According to Nichols (2020), 600 surveyed employees indicated that
while 26% would be interested in learning from their manager the most,
there were 22% who were interested in learning from their fellow peers.
Therefore, new employee onboarding or student orientations can be a critical
time to consider prompting the learner-to-learner interaction. Depending on
the scope and scale of the institution or organization leveraging the learner-
to-learner interaction could be facilitated either using an existing platform or
through pairing up learners leveraging one of the techniques introduced
earlier in this chapter.

An example of peer onboarding programs stems from the University of
California’s Office of Information Technology (OIT). Given the challenges
of COVID, the remote nature of work, and the diverse nature of the
organization, the Peer Onboarding Program sought to support employees in
connecting with each other (2021). Participation in this program required
that workers pair with individuals outside their teams at a similar professional
level and that the dyads meet for a minimum of 3–6 months. Employees
with a “buddy” reported 36% increases in satisfaction along with higher
perceived rates of organizational connection and engagement.


102 Designing for Learner–Learner Interaction

During Evaluations

Performance evaluations are yet another space where learner-to-learner
interaction may prove helpful. We will delve further into the formative
and summative modes of evaluation in Chapter 9, but a few spaces
to consider incorporating the learner-to-learner interaction include
reflective peer conversations, during 360 reviews wherein peer feedback
is solicited across organizational silos and in continuous peer training
engagements.

Constantly

The benefits of learner-to-learner interaction extend beyond specific times.
Other spaces to consider incorporating learner-to-learner individualized
lunch and learns, pair sharing, buddy systems, co-working sessions, pair-
coding, “flipped learning” pair workshops, coffee chats, or even peer learning
programs based on a class.

One example of class-based peer learning programs includes the Digital
Peer Learning Hubs for undergraduate, postgraduate, MBA, and executive
programs at the University of London, ETH Zurich, and Hult-Ashridge
(Duus & Cooray, 2022). The Digital Peer Learning Hubs has
been designed to support both short and long-term courses to capture
students’ submissions, enabling peer-to-peer feedback, and offering
transparency into how different learners approached a problem or set of
tasks.

The faculty developing The Digital Peer Learning Hubs leveraged a
three-staged framework of Action, Reflection, and Growth as the theo-
retical basis of their platform. Each stage was supported by different
activities and peer interaction. For instance, in the Action stage, learners
completed tasks in advance and received structured peer feedback on their
work. In the reflection stage, the students reflected on this feedback and
incorporated a set of action responses based on the inputs from their peers.
In the growth stage, the learners were tasked with reviewing others’ solu-
tions to see how others approached similar challenges. Throughout the
application of this framework, learners were offered templates and mate-
rials to support peer feedback and reflection. Instructors also reported
increases in student performance, high acquisition of digital skills, and a
larger sense of class cohesion.


Designing for Learner–Learner Interaction 103

Case Study/Use Case: Donut

Donut is a peer-to-peer learning application that integrates with Slack, an
internal organizational messaging and communication solution, to randomly
assign and facilitate connections between peers. Once the Donut App has
been installed, users are able to self-select into the program and indicate their
desired level of involvement, which is adjustable and may even be prompted
for adjustment by the app if low levels of involvement are detected. Once a
user has self-selected into the program, the app automatically prompts par-
ticipating users to connect on an ongoing basis (e.g., weekly, bi-weekly,
monthly) and suggests that two (or more) individuals set aside time for
coffee. In addition to arranging and prompting peer-to-peer introductions,
the app suggests times based on openings in one’s calendaring application of
choice. Since the Donut App prompts the users to meet, the app can reduce
any anxiety a newer employee may feel when asking to meet with others
either remotely or in person.

When peers meet for 30 minutes, they can select the topics of the conver-
sation, however, the app may also offer topics, ask questions, or offer sug-
gestions on what might be good to discuss during the sessions. Ultimately, the
two participants can decide how they wish to engage with one another.

Prompts following the meeting also can be configured for peers to share
feedback on what was most useful in the session, ask additional questions, or
leave a compliment for the other participant. Donut also extends its func-
tionality by creating pairings for job shadowing, knowledge sharing, or auto-
matically assigning peers to conduct quality assurance work or code reviews.

At the time of this writing, Donut has helped 15,000 teams including
Okta, Betterment, Gitlab, Zapier, and Invision make over 6+ million con-
nections across departments, office locations, and continents. Enabling
in-person, hybrid, and virtual meetings, Donut offers a flexible framework
for connecting learners to one another.

Additional Reading

A New Culture of Learning: Cultivating Imagination for a World
of Constant Change, https://www.amazon.com/New-Culture-Learning-
Cultivating-Imagination/dp/1456458884

Building a Culture of Learning: The Foundation of a Successful Organization,
https://ctdo360.td.org/pdf?src=00000159-6b7a-d69f-a5fd-7b7bf27f0000


104 Designing for Learner–Learner Interaction

References

Andrews, M., & Manning, N. (2016). A guide to peer-to-peer learning: How to make peer-
to-peer support and learning effective in the public sector. Effective Institutions Platform.
https://www.effectiveinstitutions.org/files/The_EIP_P_to_P_Learning_Guide.pdf

Baker, G. (2020). The Energy Equation: Unlocking the hidden power of energy in business.

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Boud, D., Cohen, R., & Sampson, J. (2001). Peer learning in higher education: Learning
from & with each other. Psychology Press.

Carvalho, A. R., & Santos, C. (2022). Developing peer mentors’ collaborative and me-
tacognitive skills with a technology-enhanced peer learning program. Computers and
Education Open, 3, 10.1016/j.caeo.2021.100070

Dabbagh, N., Howland, J., & Marra, R. (2019). Meaningful online learning: Integrating
strategies, activities, and learning technologies for effective designs. New York, N.Y.: Routledge.
Duus, R., & Cooray, M. (2022, August 2022). Empowering students to learn from each
other: How digital tools can enhance peer learning across student teams. Harvard
Business Publishing Education. https://hbsp.harvard.edu/inspiring-minds/empowering-

students-to-learn-from-each-other

Fake, H. (2018). A delphi study on the dimensions of personalized learning in workforce training
and development programs. [Doctoral dissertation, George Mason University]. Proquest.

Fisher, J., & Phillips, A. (2021). Work better together: How to cultivate strong relationships
to maximize well-being and boost bottom lines. McGraw Hill-Ascent Audio.

Gielen, M., & De Wever, B. (2015). Structuring peer assessment: Comparing the impact
of the degree of structure on peer feedback content. Computers in Human Behavior,
52, 315–325. Doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2015.06.019

Gilbert, C. G., Hunsaker, S., & Schmidt, B. (2007). Peer instruction: Faculty as archi-
tects of peer learning environments. BYU-Idaho Perspective, 98–115.

Haas, M., & Mortensen, M. (2016, June). The secrets of great teamwork. Harvard Business
Review. Retrieved November 30, 2022, from https://hbr.org/2016/06/the-secrets-of-
great-teamwork

Hewlett, S. A., Marshall, M., & Sherbin, L. (2013). How diversity can drive innovation.

Harvard Business Review, 91(12), 30–30.

Indian Institute of Management Bangalore Centre for Teaching & Learning. (2021). Peer
Learning: Designing Better Learning Environments. PDF. Bengaluru, India.

Klassen, J. (2004). Tools for Transformation: Write your way to new worlds of possibility in
just five minutes. Infinity Publishing.

Knowles, M. (1984). The adult learner: A neglected species (3rd ed.). Gulf Publishing.

Kulkarni, C., Kotturi, Y., Bernstein, M. S., & Klemmer, S. (2016). Designing scalable
and sustainable peer interactions online. In Design Thinking Research (pp. 237–273).
Cham: Springer.

López-Pellisa, T., Rotger, N., & Rodríguez-Gallego, F. (2021). Collaborative writing at
work: Peer feedback in a blended learning environment. Education and Information
Technologies, 26(1), 1293–1310.

Marjolaine, M. D., Lavoie, S., & Gallagher, F. (2020). Elements of group dynamics that
influence learning in small groups in undergraduate students: A scoping review. Nurse
Education Today, 87, 104362. 10.1016/j.nedt.2020.104362.


Designing for Learner–Learner Interaction 105

Naji, H. (2022). Long-Term Effects of COVID-19: A Systemic Review. European Journal
of Medical and Health Sciences, 4(4), 8–12. 10.24018/ejmed.2022.4.4.1378

Nichols, M. (2020). Transforming Universities with Digital Distance Education: The future
of formal learning. Routledge Taylor & Francis Group.

Oosta, A., & Hoatlin R.-L. (2015). Developing Stronger Peer-to-Peer Feedback in the
Undergraduate Creative Writing Workshop. Young Scholars in Writing, 9, 64–76.
Retrieved from https://youngscholarsinwriting.org/index.php/ysiw/article/view/129

Palmer, K., & Blake, D. (2018, November 18). How to help your employees learn from each
other. Harvard Business Review. Retrieved November 30, 2022, from https://hbr.org/
2018/11/how-to-help-your-employees-learn-from-each-other

Pedagogical Approaches with Canvas. (2022). Peer Learning. Retrieved November 30,
2022, from https://sites.psu.edu/pedagogicalpractices/peer-learning/

Pozzi, F., Ceregini, A., Ferlino, L., & Persico, D. (2016). Dyads versus groups: Using
different social structures in peer review to enhance online collaborative learning
processes. International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning, 17(2),
85–107.

Rabinowitz, P. (2022). Section 8. Establishing a peer education program. Chapter 24. Improving
Services | Section 8. Establishing a Peer Education Program. Retrieved November 30,
2022, from https://ctb.ku.edu/en/table-of-contents/implement/improving-services/peer-
education/main

Sampson, J., Boud, D., Cohen, R., & Gaynor, F. (1999). Designing peer learning. In
HERDSA Annual International Conference (pp. 1–12). Melbourne: HERDSA Annual
International Conference.

Simmel, G. (1950). The Sociology of Georg Simmel. Free Press.

Tuckman, B. W. (1965). Developmental sequence in small groups. Psychological Bulletin,
63(6), 384.

University of California Office of the President. (2021). UCOP Human Resources.
Retrieved November 30, 2022, from https://www.ucop.edu/local-human-resources/
manager-resources/hiring-process/on-boarding.html

Zamberlan, L., & Wilson, S. (2015). Developing an embedded peer tutor program in design
studio to support first year design students. Journal of Peer Learning, 8(2015), 5–17.


Designing for          6

Learner–Small Group

Interaction

Figure 6.0 Learner-Small Group Interaction.

Learner-Small Group Interaction

In Chapter 3, we described learner-small group interaction as an important
interaction for supporting personalized learning. Experts who participated in

DOI: 10.4324/9781003121008-6


Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction 107

the Delphi study described the purpose of small group interactions as a place
to meet with others to address similar needs, questions, or challenges based
on specific strengths or weaknesses. Experts also noted that how groups are
formed, their purpose or topic, and how someone joins a group, are
important aspects for consideration in personalizing the learning experience.
Small group learning is defined as “a method that can supplement case
discussions, lectures and other class formats” where “students work together
in groups of typically 3–6 members, helping each other think critically,
master course concepts, and apply them to real-world situations” and where
“students are motivated toward a common goal and work together to support
each other’s learning” (Teaching a Course, n.d.). It is important to note that
small group learning is different from working in teams. Working in teams
or teamwork typically involves longer periods of time than small group
learning, and team members are usually consistent across time, and there is
more interdependence in completing the task. Whereas small group learning
tends to be more informal and brief and can happen multiple times in one
class or training session.

In higher education contexts, learning science research has shown that
small-group learning (when compared to competitive and individualistic
learning) improves academic achievement, relationships with classmates and
faculty, and promotes psychological well-being (Teaching a Course, n.d.).
Johnson et. al. (2014) conducted a meta-analysis of small group learning in
higher education and summarized the benefits as follows:

•  Small group learning enables students to develop a deeper understanding
of the content regardless of the subject matter and helps students
become better at problem-solving.

•  Small group learning improves attendance, efficiency, and persistence.

•  Small group learning helps students develop social and leadership skills.

•  Students who engage in small group learning are more likely to integrate
across different ethnic, cultural, language, class, ability, and gender groups.

•  Small-group learning encourages people who normally would not
participate in front of the whole class to participate.

•  Small group learning promotes self-esteem when compared to competi-
tive or individualistic learning.

Learner-small group interaction has also been effective in supporting workplace
or professional learning. For example, in health professional education, small
group learning has been implemented using strategies or teaching approaches
such as Problem-Based Learning (PBL) and Case-Based Learning (CBL).


108 Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction

Research has shown that small group methods remain the preferred approach
when compared to lecture-based teaching, instructor-led training, or self-paced
individualized learning (Burgess, van Diggele, Roberts, et al., 2020). Burgess
et   al. argue that small group learning in the workplace encourages active par-
ticipation in the learning process and enhances the learning experience by
promoting self-directed learning (an adult learning principle), supporting a
range of perspectives from peers, providing opportunities to give and receive
feedback from peers, allowing the testing of ideas and attitudes with peers, and
developing critical thinking and problem-solving skills. Small group learning or
learner-small group interaction is sometimes referred to as collaborative or
cooperative learning.

In Valamis’ Develop and Maintain Learning Culture Workbook (2022),
cooperative learning is defined as either formal, informal, or small group
based. Additionally, five fundamental elements that distinguish cooperative
learning from other forms of group learning are provided. These include

(1) positive interdependence, (2) individual and group accountability,

(3) interpersonal and small group skills, (4) face-to-face interaction, and

(5) group processing (Siikanen et al., 2020).

Collaborative learning on the other hand, or collaboration, is the act of
fostering interaction, conversation, and joining of resources by two or more
learners to complete any number of learning activities (Dabbagh et al.,
2019). The goal of collaborative learning is to require learners to solve
problems and to reflect on, articulate, and explore knowledge with peers and
instructors (Laal & Ghodsi, 2011). Collaborative learning can look quite
different depending on the instructional environment in which it is im-
plemented. It is most easily understood as pairs or groups of students in-
teracting with one another to maximize their own and one another’s learning
(Oliveira, Tinoca, & Pereira, 2011). Learners control the learning in col-
laborative activities and the role of the instructor, facilitator, coach, or
mentor is to help learners negotiate through the learning activity (Dabbagh,
Marra, & Howland, 2019).

Types of Learner-Small Group Interaction

As mentioned in Chapter 5, The Centre for Learning Excellence in Bangalore
India (2021) identified five different types of learner-learner and learner-small
group interactions: (1) Peer Interaction, (2) Peer Feedback, (3) Peer
Collaboration, (4) Peer Response, and (5) Peer Facilitation. The first two
types,  Peer Interaction and Peer Feedback, were discussed in Chapter 5,


Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction 109

Designing for Learner To Learner Interaction. In this chapter we focus on Peer
Collaboration, Peer Response, and Peer Facilitation, and how these types of
interaction work in small group contexts. It is important to note that Peer
Interaction and Peer Feedback may also be adjusted to fit learner-small group
interaction.

Peer Collaboration

Peer collaboration involves working in groups or teams to solve problems, gain
proficiency in a concept space, or deepen understanding after a topic has been
introduced. In this type of learner-small group interaction, instructors function
more as facilitators. The role of the instructor is to monitor the progress of
learners, facilitate dialogue, and ensure teams are formed that support diverse
perspectives. The inevitable debates that may arise between learners in this type
of interaction help develop social, argumentation, and reasoning skills, as is the
case in Problem-Based Learning (PBL). In PBL, students, in small groups of
5–7, deliberate on a complex problem using what they collectively understand
by applying their knowledge to the problem. Through the group’s interaction,
learners elaborate on their understanding while realizing that they lack some of
the knowledge that is necessary to solve the problem. Students summarize what
they know about the problem and what they need to learn to fully understand
the problem (Blumberg, 2019).

An example of peer collaboration could be found in many “tiger teams” in
a corporate work environment. For instance, at an organization in the Mid-
Atlantic region, a group of workers had identified the problem that there was
no central repository for locating customer testimonials and feedback despite
the fact that the organization had collected a range of data about the cus-
tomer voice to include surveys, interviews, member services calls, social
media feedback, product reviews, and more. In this situation, a small group
of workers sought manager project approval given the challenges they saw.
Upon obtaining approval, the workers met on a weekly basis to conduct an
internal “listening tour” with stakeholders, capture requirements, identify
potential feedback repository solutions, centralize resources using the
appropriate technology, and distribute access to the resulting repository.
Throughout, the manager offered touchpoints with the team to ensure that
the project was on track, that all viewpoints were taken into consideration,
and offered suggestions on how to best position the project for success. This
process made it easier for the organization to find resources and videos
wherein members communicate their experiences. The end result was that


110 Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction

problems were quickly identified in the source materials enabling the orga-
nization to address the feedback more effectively and efficiently.

Peer Response

Peer response leverages the Socratic method of instruction wherein faculty or
instructors facilitate or moderate student discussions. In this type of learner-small
group interaction, the instructor or trainer plays an active role in guiding the
conversation toward learning outcomes by asking questions, redirecting focus, or
even posing scenarios for the small groups to consider. Peer response interaction
deepens learner understanding and engagement with the training content and may
be helpful following the presentation of introductory content (Zakrajsek, 2018).
instructional approaches where peer response interactions take place include case
studies, concept tests, role plays, student panels, and class demonstrations. For
example, in a Chief Learning Officer (CLO) professional development program at
a large mid-Atlantic university, participants were asked to read a case study and
respond to the following prompts in an online discussion forum:

•  What are the organizational issues that Craig (the actor in the case study)
is facing and what should he do next to move forward?

•  What issues need to be discussed and made part of the consultant/client
contract at the beginning of an instructional design project and how
might you as a CLO implement an organizational strategy that would
support such contracts?

After the CLO program participants responded to these prompts online, they
were able to see peer responses and they were asked to respond to at least two
peer posts. This created learner-small group interactions within the larger
group through the discussion. When the online discussion ended, the
instructor provided a debrief on the case, summarized participants online
responses to the initial prompts, and engaged the participants in an in-person
discussion to compare their responses with the case study debrief, creating a
deeper understanding of, and engagement in the learning content.

Peer Facilitation (Peer Facilitated Instruction)

Peer facilitation can be described as a type of learner-small group inter-
action where students (not instructors) facilitate peer learning activities


Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction 111

(Centre for Teaching & Learning, 2021). The role of peer facilitation may
fall to one single student (or learner) earmarked by the instructor or may
rotate among learners. This type of learner-small group interaction requires
that the instructor supports students or workers as they develop the skills
to tutor other students in peer led facilitation, student-led curriculum
development, mutual peer tutoring, or rotated instruction. The benefits of
these instructional models or approaches are associated with extending the
scale of faculty or instructors by offering students the chance to instruct
their fellow peers. This gives facilitating learners an opportunity to more
deeply learn about the topic, gain a sense of responsibility, and refine their
communication skills. The non-facilitating students benefit by having
increased levels of interaction with one another as well as increased access
to a facilitator. While this type of learner-small group interaction may
extend the scale at which an instructor can reach students, one must be
cautious and careful to ensure that peer facilitators are trained and pre-
pared for their engagements with clear outcomes and expectations. The
facilitators may require ongoing feedback to ensure they are meeting the
overarching objectives of the instruction or training.

Designing Learner-Small Group Interaction

Designing learner-small group interactions involves aligning the type of
interaction with appropriate instructional strategies and learning activities to
ensure effective implementation. Instructional strategies are what instructors,
instructional designers, or instructional systems implement to facilitate student
learning. Jonassen, Grabinger, and Harris (1991) described instructional
strategies as “the plans and techniques that the instructor or instructional
designer uses to engage the learner and facilitate learning” (p. 34). Instructional
strategies are also referred to as teaching strategies or approaches. In the
instructional design process, instructional strategies are selected after identi-
fying the learning outcomes and assessment criteria for an instructional
module, course, or curriculum. Additionally, instructional strategies break
down into learning activities or tasks aimed at helping the learner achieve a
specific learning outcome. Learner-to-small group interactions can be im-
plemented in an in-person learning context (e.g., classroom) as well as an
online learning context. Table 6.1 provides a snapshot of how the three types
of learner-to-small group interaction provided in this chapter, i.e., peer col-
laboration, peer response, and peer facilitation, can be implemented using
learning technologies. The categories of learning technologies that best support


112 Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction


Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction 113


114 Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction

Figure 6.1 Classes of Learning Technologies.

the implementation of learner-to-small group interaction are Collaboration
and Communication Tools, Knowledge Representation Tools, and Content
Creation Tools (see Figure 6.1).

Below we select a few instructional strategies and corresponding learning
activities from each type of learner-to-small group interaction listed in
Table 6.1 and provide examples of how this can be implemented using
appropriate learning technologies.

Peer Collaboration Using Design Thinking/
Collaborative Brainstorming

Design thinking is a human-centered approach to problem-solving and
innovation that has gained momentum in the business world and higher
education settings in recent decades (Brown, 2009; Gardner, 2017). Design
thinking (or DT) is a collaborative process that engages participants in out-
of-the-box thinking through empathy, invention, and iteration. The goal of
design thinking is to effectuate positive change that responds to the needs of


Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction 115

consumers and evolves the organization’s culture blending both continuity
and change (Vogel, 2009). Collaborative brainstorming is an excellent
activity that supports design thinking.

More specifically, collaborative brainstorming or “brainstorming” is a cog-
nitive activity or method that engages group members in creative problem-
solving by encouraging them to share ideas while withholding criticism or
judgment (Rudy, 2017). Brainstorming has become a standard tool for idea-
tion (development of new ideas) that leads to innovation. The concept of
brainstorming can be traced to Alex Osborn who believed that creativity is
fundamental to business success and that everyone has the potential to be
creative and learn creative skills (Osborn, 1952). Collaborative brainstorming
is widely used in organizations and has taken on a variety of methods begin-
ning with what Osborn called Creative Problem Solving or CPS which
includes four steps (clarify, ideate, develop, and implement) to the more recent
design thinking approach which is based on the principles of empathy, cre-
ativity, efficiency, and efficacy.

Collaborative brainstorming and design thinking exercises can be im-
plemented with collaborative and communication technologies that support
virtual chat and whiteboarding sessions such as Zoom, Skype, MS Teams,
Blackboard Collaborate, and MURAL, as well as knowledge representation
tools such as Coggle, Bubble, iBrainstorm, and Popplet. In order to support
practitioners interested in integrating design thinking within their organiza-
tions, MURAL, a visual collaboration workspace and Hanno, a team of digital
product designers, teamed up to create a two-and-a-half-hour virtual design
thinking workshop (Kalbach, 2015). DT workshops are typically held face-to-
face using lots of sticky notes and flipcharts because of their ease of use, ver-
satility, and ability to foster communication. However, facilitating face-to-face
DT workshops is no longer effective or even feasible in some cases given the
modern-day workplace and remote work culture where organizational teams
can be spread across multiple locations. MURAL and Hanno’s goal was to
facilitate a DT workshop virtually and they selected the following three
technologies that belong to the category of Collaboration and Communication
Tools and Knowledge Representation Tools for this exercise: (1) Zoom, a
video conferencing tool, (2) Slack, a platform that facilitates group chat, and

(3) MURAL, for mimicking a DT workspace and capturing and organizing
ideas that emerged from the virtual session. Figure 6.2 demonstrates how the
three technologies used for this workshop (Zoom, Slack, and MURAL)
functioned simultaneously on a user’s computer screen.

The DT workshop, which included 24 participants spread across different
locations, sought to solve the problem of increasing employee trust and


116 Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction

Figure 6.2 Design Thinking Workshop Facilitated Through Zoom, Slack, and
MURAL.

collaboration in remote and virtual spaces using design thinking techniques.
The virtual design thinking workshop began with a warm-up exercise (ice
breaker activity) to get participants acquainted with the three different
platforms (Zoom, Slack, and MURAL). Zoom was used to introduce par-
ticipants to each other through real-time audio and video and to familiarize
participants with its screen-sharing feature. After the warm-up exercise, the
entire group reconvened in Zoom to reflect on the collaborative experience.
Then, participants were divided into six breakout groups and each group
(N = 4) was given a four-step design thinking challenge which engaged them
in collaborative brainstorming. The workshop ultimately supported partici-
pants in learning a new behavior to bring back to their organizations as well
as developing solutions and strategies for dealing with resistance to virtual
work practice.

Collaborative brainstorming can also be facilitated using knowledge rep-
resentation tools such as concept mapping tools. In a higher education class,
students were asked to contribute concepts to a collaborative concept
mapping software known as Popplet. Students were grouped into small
teams and asked to share concepts in the form of a cognitive map using
Popplet, provide definitions of these concepts, and articulate relations
between and across these concepts. The goal was to develop a scale based on
these concepts to be used in evaluating the learning design effectiveness of a


Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction 117

 marleyD 

Cognitive
Apprenticeship
(Ch      2)


 Daniel 

Learning By
Doing
(Ch 10)

Daniel

Experiential
Learning
(Ch     1)

Maha

 Rose 

Learning By
Teaching (Ch 7)


 Daniel 

Experimentation
(Ch 4)

Leshell 

Model-Building
(Ch 4) Please
see my note at
the    bottom of
this wild page
about why i’d
add model-
building to
conceptual
change.

Figure 6.3 An Example of Using Popplet for Collaborative Brainstorming.

technology-supported learning environment. Figure 6.3 shows the concept
map created by a group of four students in this class.

Peer Collaboration Using The Jigsaw Method

The Jigsaw method, or teaching technique, is a cooperative learning strategy
that enables each student/learner of a small group to specialize in one aspect
of a topic, learn about this topic, and present the topic to the group, enabling
feedback from each member of the group using a set of guidelines or a rubric
that has been set forth by the instructor. The group can then reconcile or
synthesize their specialized research into a final report or presentation or use
the feedback to improve their understanding of the topic. The final pre-
sentations provide all group members with an understanding of their own
material, as well as the findings that have emerged from topic-specific group
discussions. The jigsaw method is impactful because it gives learners the


118 Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction

opportunity to synthesize information in a topic area well enough to present
it, and it provides an efficient way to learn an altogether different topic area
at the same time. Essentially, each individual becomes an expert in a par-
ticular defined domain and then pairs with someone who has related ex-
pertise on another topic to share knowledge.

Oakes, Hegedus, Ollerenshaw, Drury, and Richie (2019) studied the use
of the Jigsaw Method to teach abdominal anatomy by splitting up 53 stu-
dents into four groups. Fifty-three volunteers were assigned to one of four
stations of the axial computerized topography of the abdominal cavity. Later,
students were redistributed into their jigsaw groups to include at least one
“expert” from each workstation. Pre and post-test assessments showed sta-
tistical improvements in quiz scores and high levels of reported enjoyment
and perceptions of educational value suggesting the method may serve as a
great short-term strategy for improving student performance, satisfaction,
and motivation.

Nalls and Wickerd (2022) propose that beyond improving academic
outcomes, the practices associated with the Jigsaw Method may also promote
prosocial behaviors and increase perceptions of inclusion and improved social
interaction between diverse populations. Additional research is needed to see
if these theories manifest empirically, however, the work introduces inter-
esting ideas for how one might design for inclusion and diversity in higher
education and workforce training and development programs.

Yet another example of the Jigsaw method was observed in a motorcycle
safety education course. The two police officers instructing the class asked
different class members to read, review, and summarize the content in the
provided book. Following the individualized study, students were asked to
share their key takeaways in groups.

Peer Response Using Online Discussions

Online discussions (also known as “threaded discussions” because discussion
boards break down into forums to accommodate multiple topics and forums
are organized by threads to reflect subtopics or areas of interest) support
articulation by engaging learners in dialogue or discourse about a specific
topic. Online discussions provide learners with opportunities for explana-
tion, reasoning, critique, justification, argumentation, and exposure to
multiple perspectives all of which lead to meaningful learning (Dabbagh
et  al., 2019). Online discussions can be synchronous or asynchronous,
structured or open-ended, and formal or non-formal. Structured or formal


Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction 119

online discussions are designed to engage learners in discourse on a specific
topic for a finite period of time, whereas open-ended or non-formal online
discussions are designed to promote continuous or spontaneous dialogue
surrounding multiple topics or topics selected by learners. Online discussions
can  be text-based or audio or video-driven depending on the technology
used, the topic and nature of the discussion, the size of the learner group, and
the goal of the discussion.

Asynchronous online discussions can be supported using Learning
Management Systems (LMS) or other collaboration and communication
tools such as VoiceThread, Google Groups, and Padlet. Formal online dis-
cussions require facilitators (moderators) to moderate the discussion.
Moderating an online discussion involves posting engaging questions,
prompting meaningful responses from participants, keeping the discussion
focused on the topic, and providing a summary or synthesis at the end of the
discussion that demonstrates collective knowledge construction and enables
reflection. Although instructors typically assume the role of moderating an
online discussion, learners can also be assigned as facilitators or moderators,
particularly in large classes (an example of this was provided earlier in this
chapter). Protocols and rubrics for participating in, moderating, and evalu-
ating online discussions should be provided to learners before the discussion
begins to establish goals and expectations.

Overall, the research highlights the benefits of asynchronous online dis-
cussions as providing opportunities for reflective learning and meaningful
processing of subject matter content because of the “delayed” or asynchro-
nous nature of the discourse or dialogue (Hara, Bonk, & Angeli, 2000).
Asynchronous online discussions also allow students to participate at their
own pace giving them time to read peer posts, think about the points made
by their peers, and develop their own responses. Additionally, the collabo-
rative and conversational nature of asynchronous online discussions allows
learners to share their ‘developing’ understandings.

Peer Response Using The Case Study Method

As mentioned earlier in this chapter, the case study method (the use of cases for
teaching) is an appropriate method to elicit peer response in learner-small
group interaction. The Center for Teaching and Learning defines the case
study method as follows: “This method is learner-centered with intense inter-
action between participants as they build their knowledge and work together as a
group to examine the case” (Centre for Teaching and Learning, 2022). Using a


120 Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction

case-based approach engages students in discussion of specific scenarios that
resemble or typically are real-world examples. The instructor’s role is that of a
facilitator while the students collaboratively analyze and address problems and
resolve questions that have no single right answer. As described by Savery
(2019, p. 89, in Wiley PBL Handbook) “A case study is usually designed by an
expert in the content domain with the intended purpose of telling a story that
presents critical pieces of information needed to solve the case”.

Harvard University’s Law School and School of Business use the case
study method as their instructional approach. Through the Case
Development Initiative, this case study method of instruction uses real-world
examples and video summaries of strategic and organizational issues to
increase the fidelity and complexity of the cases. Learners must consider each
situation from multiple perspectives, identify key challenges in the case,
reconcile the interests of different stakeholders presented in the case, and
develop appropriate strategies to resolve each case. For example, the learner
may need to analyze both the stakeholders’ interests and motivations and the
underlying incentives and mission of the organization depicted in the case
before arriving at a solution. These enhanced case studies use technology to

bring real‐life situations to classroom settings, helping students prepare for

their professional careers (Harvard Kennedy School, n.d.). An extensive

library of case studies organized by subject and implementation type (role
play, workshop, or discussion) has been developed using this more authentic
approach to the case study method.

Peer Facilitation Using Online Discussions

In this example of peer-facilitated instruction, the instructor of a doctoral
class in a higher education institution created small student groups,
five students per group, and assigned a peer facilitator for each group.
Group members were selected based on their common research interests
but members of each group were reassigned to different groups so that
they can also learn from peers that have different research interests. There
were four consecutive online discussions and two groups in each discus-
sion. Peer facilitators were assigned for each group and new peer facili-
tators were assigned each time the group members were rotated. This gave
each student the opportunity to be a peer facilitator. Table 6.2 provides
an example of criteria that peer facilitators must follow or be held
accountable for when facilitating online discussions, a type of peer-
facilitated instruction.


Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction 121

Table 6.2 Criteria for Facilitating Online Discussions

Criteria for Facilitating Online Discussions

Facilitator or discussant will demonstrate an observable understanding of the
topic being discussed. The understanding will be at the critical thinking and
synthesis level.

Facilitator or discussant will demonstrate an ability to engage peers in a
discussion that is relevant to the topic concepts. This can be done in a
variety of ways including but not limited to: posing engaging and probing
questions; eliciting responses; and building on responses.

Facilitator or discussant will demonstrate the ability to effectively organize the
discussion. This includes: keeping the discussion focused on the topic;
providing structure; staying within the timeframe allotted for discussion; and
ensuring all participants are engaging and receiving commentary on their
contributions.

Facilitator or discussant will demonstrate the ability to help participants relate
the concepts discussed to personal and professional experience by using
examples from everyday practices.

Peer Facilitation Using PBL “Lunch and Learn” in
Workforce Contexts

An example of peer facilitation stems from a Mid-Atlantic financial man-
agement company that leverages peer facilitation using the format of a
“lunch and learn” program and the Problem-Based Learning (PBL) teaching
approach. Instruction in PBL begins with a problem to solve thereby en-
gaging learners in complex problem-solving activities. Learners are placed in
small groups of four to six and introduced to a real-world problem that is
complex and has multiple solutions and solution paths, and are provided
with an iterative heuristic problem-solving model (a reasoning process) that
supports reasoning, problem-solving, and critical thinking skills. Tutors or
teachers are assigned to each group and act as facilitators prompting the
problem-solving process and providing appropriate resources. The major
goals of PBL are to help students develop collaborative learning skills, rea-
soning skills, interpersonal and communication skills, and self-directed
learning strategies (Barrows, 1985).

In the format of the lunch and learn session, the peer facilitator introduces
a problem statement to the group and encourages a range of potential
conversations they could select from to encourage inter-team conversations
within defined breakout rooms. In one example, the User Research Team
provided seven different rooms with seven separate peer facilitators. Each


122 Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction

room represented seven different parts of the website that users could be
exploring (e.g., new member onboarding, popular web pages, order page
experience, etc.). Each peer facilitator met with the User Research Team
prior to the live lunch and learn session, was offered a facilitator guide re-
garding the format of the session, was given access to curated user videos to
be used in the session, and was offered conversation starters through a
facilitator script. These scripts were drafted to encourage group dialogue
about what participants were witnessing in the videos. Facilitators also had
an online whiteboard they could use to capture the ongoing dialogue
between group participants. After the session, participants were brought back
to discuss their key findings and defined next steps.

Given that the lunch and learns involved participants from multiple
departments, the practice sought to break down organizational silos, en-
courage cross-team idea sharing, and support collaborative and ongoing re-
lationships that lead to increased understanding of the website and actionable
insights. The process also brought more awareness to the challenges faced by
users navigating and leveraging the resources of the site.

Use Case Integrating the three Types of Learner To
Small Group Interaction

Harvard  University’s  Collaborative  on  Academic  Careers  in  Higher
Education (COACHE) survey is an effort to help higher education institu-
tions improve faculty recruitment, development, and retention. Using
COACHE data, more than 300 colleges, universities, and state systems have
strengthened their capacity to identify the drivers of faculty success and
implement informed changes (Harvard Graduate School, 2022). George
Mason University (GMU), a mid-Atlantic university in the U.S., is among
the 300 colleges/universities that have benefited from COACHE data. One
outcome of this research-driven initiative is the design and implementation
of Faculty Mentoring Communities (FMC). We provide evidence in this last
section of the chapter that FMC is an effective use case example of learner-
small group interaction that exemplifies peer collaboration, peer response,
and peer facilitation.

The COACHE survey revealed that new faculty members (NFM) need a
system to help them integrate into the academic culture of the university and
plan for academic success. It is no longer sufficient for NFM to attend formal
workshops to understand how to navigate the tenure and promotion system
nor to have the department chair be solely responsible for providing related


Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction 123

advice, mentoring, or coaching. Given this data, GMU established the
Faculty Mentoring Communities (FMC) program and began reaching out to
incoming tenure-track faculty and assistant professors to participate in these
communities.

So what exactly is an FMC? The Faculty Mentoring Communities pro-
gram is a university-wide, interdisciplinary program that provides new
tenure-track faculty with resources to enhance learning, conduct significant
research, and develop strategies to boost engagement and well-being (see
Faculty Resources, 2022). It is based on the concept of learning communities
that facilitate a sense of community, relationships with colleagues across
campus, and an environment to encourage interdisciplinary collaborations
and ideas. More specifically, learning communities are groups of people who
support each other in their learning agendas, working together on projects,
learning from one another as well as from their environment and engaging in
a collective sociocultural experience where participation is transformed into a
new experience or new learning (Rogoff, 1994; Wilson & Ryder, 1998).
Learning communities are considered informal learning environments that
represent an intentional restructuring of participants’ time and learning ex-
periences around an interdisciplinary theme to foster more explicit intel-
lectual and emotional connections between peers and between disciplines
(MacGregor, Smith, Tinto, & Levine, 1999). They act as academic and
social support structures that allow people to learn in more authentic and
challenging ways.

Learning communities are also called knowledge-building communities
(Dabbagh & Bannan-Ritland, 2005). Knowledge-building communities are
learning communities in which communication is perceived as transforma-
tive (resulting in a new experience or learning) through knowledge sharing
and generation. Participants in a knowledge-building community “share a
common goal of building meaningful knowledge representations through
activities, projects and discussion” and the instructor or tutor “is an active,
learning participant in the community” (Selinger & Pearson, 1999, p. 41)
(i.e., a peer). It is important to note that while the terms learning commu-
nities and communities of practice (COP) are synonymous constructs, the
term learning communities is perceived as a broader or more loosely defined
term that encompasses any social network or infrastructure that brings
people together to share and pursue knowledge. In Chapter 8, we will look at
COPs in depth and how they differ from learning communities when we
discuss designing for learner-social network interaction.

As mentioned earlier in this chapter, learner-small group interaction is an
important interaction for supporting personalized learning. Experts who


124 Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction

participated in the Delphi study described the purpose of small group in-
teractions as a place to meet with others to address similar needs, questions,
or challenges based on specific strengths or weaknesses. Additionally, experts
also noted that how groups are formed, their purpose or topic, and how
someone joins a group, are important aspects for consideration in person-
alizing the learning experience. The FMC program aligns well with these
experts’ descriptions of learner-small group interaction. For example,
selecting Distinguished Faculty Mentors (DFM) to facilitate FMC is based
on the following criteria: DFMs must be tenured faculty who are established
and respected scholars and researchers, recognized mentors of students or
faculty in their discipline, highly regarded teachers, willing to learn and
share, and who can speak to the University’s” values and mission.
Additionally, DFMs should represent the diversity of incoming faculty and
be comfortable facilitating and working with individuals across disciplines.

The FMC program at GMU uses the core curriculum of the National
Center for Faculty Development and Diversity (NCFDD) and focuses on
the following six themes recognized as key to faculty success: (1) establishing
a professional identity; (2) creating a successful research agenda; (3)
strengthening teaching and learning effectiveness; (4) approaching men-
toring; (5) successfully navigating the academy; and (6) developing strategies
for work-life integration. Participants in the FMC program are mentored in
small groups by teams of DFMs from across the university. Over two
semesters, participants will create concrete goals, plans, and benchmarks to
guide their paths toward the three-year review that leads to achieving tenure.
As a DFM, I planned and facilitated six 1.5-hour FMC sessions with my peer
DFM, during the fall semester of 2022. The sessions took place online,
synchronously, and over Zoom. Our FMC had 6 NFMs who actively par-
ticipated in these sessions.

Here is how the three types of learner-small group interaction: Peer
Collaboration, Peer Response, and Peer Facilitation were exemplified in these
FMC sessions:

•  Peer Collaboration - NFMs worked in small groups to create a strategic
plan, which is the first core skill of the NCFDD curriculum. In each
session, two breakout rooms were created in Zoom for two groups of
3 NFMs each. The facilitators (DFMs) ensured the groups were formed
in such a way as to support diverse perspectives given the inter-
disciplinary nature of the FMC. The groups worked on their strategic
plan for teaching, research, and service. Each participant was provided a
tab in a Google doc to document their strategic plan using a SMART


Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction 125

Goals template. The participants then shared their strategic plans
verbally across groups and the DFMs facilitated the dialogue, monitored
progress, and provided feedback.

•  Peer Response - NFMs were asked to provide comments on each
others’ strategic plans directly in the google document using the
commenting feature. During the second FMC session, participants
were divided into small groups again using breakout rooms and were
asked to address peer comments orally, whether they agreed with these
comments (why or why not), and how they plan to address them. This
was a round-robin or jigsaw method type of exercise. The DFMs guided
the conversation within each breakout room toward learning outcomes
by asking questions, redirecting focus, or even posing scenarios for the
small groups to consider.

•  Peer Facilitation - for the remaining three FMC sessions of the
semester, three NFM participants were each assigned an NCFDD
core skill that was not discussed in the first two FMC sessions and asked
to watch the associated video on the NCFDD platform, summarize their
understanding of that skill using PPT slides, and explain it to the group.
This was peer facilitation using a rotated student-led instruction activity.

References

Barrows, H. S. (1985). How to design a problem-based curriculum for the preclinical years.

New York: Springer Publishing Co.

Blumberg, P. (2019). Designing for Effective Group Process in PBL Using a Learner-
Centered Teaching Approach. In M. Moallem, W. Hung, and N. Dabbagh (Eds.),
The Wiley Handbook of PBL (pp. 343–365). Wiley & Sons Inc.

Brown, T. (2009). Change by design: How design thinking transforms organizations and
inspires innovation. New York, NY: HarperCollins Publishers.

Burgess, A., van Diggele, C., Roberts, C., & Mellis, C. (2020). Feedback in the clinical
setting. BMC Medical Education, 20(460), 1–6.

Centre for Teaching and Learning. (2022). Case-based learning. Retrieved December 1,
2022, from https://www.queensu.ca/ctl/resources/instructional-strategies/case-based-
learning

Dabbagh, N. & Bannan-Ritland, B. (2005). Online learning: Concepts, strategies, and
application. Prentice Hall: Pearson Education.

Dabbagh, N., Howland, J., & Marra, R. (2019). Meaningful online learning: Integrating
strategies, activities, and learning technologies for effective designs. Routledge.

Faculty Resources. (2022). Faculty mentoring communities. Retrieved December 1, 2022, from
https://faculty.gmu.edu/professional-development/faculty-mentoring-communities

Gardner, L. (2017, September 10). Can design thinking redesign higher ed? Chronicle of
Higher Education. Retrieved from http://www.chronicle.com/article/Can-Design-
Thinking-Redesign/241126


126 Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction

Hara, N., Bonk, C. J., & Angeli, C. (2000). Content analysis of online discussion in an
applied educational psychology course. Instructional Science, 28(2), 115–152.

Harvard Graduate School of Education. (2022, September 28). Collaborative on academic
careers in Higher Education. COACHE. Retrieved December 1, 2022, from https://
coache.gse.harvard.edu/

Harvard Kennedy School. (2022). Teaching a course. Retrieved December 1, 2022, from
https://www.hks.harvard.edu/more/about/leadership-administration/academic-deans-
office/slate/teaching-resources/teaching-course

Harvard Kennedy School (n.d.) Teaching a course. Retrieved November 4, 2022 from
https://www.hks.harvard.edu/more/about/leadership-administration/academic-deans-
office/slate/teaching-resources/teaching-course

Indian Institute of Management Bangalore Centre for Teaching & Learning. (2021). Peer
Learning: Designing Better Learning Environments. PDF. Bengaluru, India.

Johnson, D. W., Johnson, R. T., & Smith, K. A. (2014). Cooperative learning:
Improving university instruction by basing practice on validated theory. Journal on
Excellence in College Teaching, 25(3&4), 85–118.

Jonassen, D. H., Grabinger, R. S., & Harris, N. D. C. (1991). Instructional strategies and
tactics. Performance Improvement Quarterly, 3(2), 29–47.x.

Kalbach, J. (2015, March 10). Recap: MURAL + Hanno co-host a remote design
thinking workshop. [Web log comment]. Retrieved from http://blog.mural.co/2017/
03/11/recap-mural-hanno-co-host-a-remote-design-thinking-workshop

Laal, M., & Ghodsi, S. (2011). Benefits of collaborative learning. Procedia Social and
Behavioral Sciences, 31, 486–490. https://blogs.ubc.ca/eoassei/two-stage-exams/

MacGregor, J., Smith, B. L., Tinto, V., & Levine, J. H. (1999). Learning about learning
communities: Taking student learning seriously. Materials prepared for the National
Resource Center  for  the First-Year Experience  and Students  in Transition
Teleconference, Columbia, South Carolina, April 19, 1999.

Nalls, A. J., & Wickerd, G. (2022). The jigsaw method: Reviving a powerful positive
intervention. Journal of Applied School Psychology, DOI: 10.1080/15377903.2022.
2124570.

Oakes, D., Hegedus, E., Ollerenshaw, S. L., Drury, H., & Richie, H. (2019). Using the
jigsaw method to teach abdominal anatomy. Anatomical Sciences Education, 12(3),
DOI: 10.1002/ase.1802.

Oliveira, I., Tinoca, L., & Pereira, A. (2011). Online group work patterns: How to
promote a successful collaboration. Computers & Education, 57(1), 1348–1357. doi:
10.1016/j.compedu.2011.01.017.

Oosta, A., & Hoatlin, R. L. (2015). Developing Stronger Peer-to-Peer Feedback in the
Undergraduate Creative Writing Workshop. Young Scholars in Writing, 9, 64–76.
Retrieved from https://youngscholarsinwriting.org/index.php/ysiw/article/view/129

Osborn, A. F. (1942). How to think up. McGraw-Hill.

Osborn, A. (1952) Wake up your mind: 101 ways to develop creativeness. New York, NY:
Scribner’s.

Rogoff, B. (1994). Developing understanding of the idea of communities of learners.

Mind, Culture, and Activity, 4, 209–229.

Rudy, L. J. (2017, January 16). What is the definition of brainstorming? (For groups and
individuals) [web log post]. Retrieved from https://business.tutsplus.com/tutorials/
what-is-the-definition-of-brainstorming–cms-27997


Designing for Learner–Small Group Interaction 127

Savery, J. (2019). Comparative Pedagogical Models of Problem-Based Learning. In

M. Moallem, W. Hung, and N. Dabbagh (Eds.), The Wiley Handbook of PBL

(pp. 343–365). Wiley & Sons Inc.

Selinger, M., & Pearson, J. (Eds.). (1999). Telematics in Education: Trends and Issues.

Kidlington, Oxford, UK: Pergamon, An Imprint of Elsevier Science.

Siikanen, R., Härkin, J., Lemmetyinen, J., & Vieira, D. (2020, August 11). Cooperative
learning: Benefits, strategies, and activities. Valamis. Retrieved November 18, 2022,
from https://www.valamis.com/hub/cooperative-learning#what-is-cooperative-learning

Siikanen, R., Härkin, J., Lemmetyinen, J., & Vieira, D. (2022, September). Develop and
Maintain Strategy-Driven Learning Culture. Valamis. Retrieved November 18, 2022, from
https://www.valamis.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/learning-culture-workbook.pdf

Vogel, C. M. (2009). Notes on the evolution of design thinking: A work in progress.

Design Management Review, 20(2), 16–27.

Wilson, B., & Ryder, M. (1998). Distributed learning communities: An alternative to
designed instructional systems. Available: http://www.cudenver.edu/~bwilson/dlc.
html [2000].

Zakrajsek, T. (2018). Reframing the lecturer versus active learning debate: Suggestions for
a new way forward, 1(1), 1–3. DOI: 10.4103/EHP.EHP_14_18


Designing for          7

Learner–Mentor, Coach,

or AI Interaction

Figure 7.0 Learner-Mentor, Coaches, AI Interaction.

Defining the Terms

For the purposes of this chapter, it is first necessary to define our terms and
differentiate between mentors, coaches, and AI coaches. As Marcdante and

DOI: 10.4324/9781003121008-7


Designing for Learner–Mentor, Coach, or AI Interaction 129

Simpson (2018) promote, defining the distinctions within the relationships is
necessary to ensure stakeholder expectations are in alignment (e.g., learner to
trainer, coach, faculty member, etc.). In their definition, advising, coaching, and
mentoring encompass three distinct approaches to providing guidance which is
characterized by a spectrum of the intensity and duration of the engagement.
On the lower end of intensity and duration advising relates to a point in
time event wherein the advisor is asked a specific question or opinion on a topic
of focus wherein the learner may or may not follow the advice of an advisor.
Coaching concentrates on the learners’ short and longer-term goals
referencing a specific performance target over time. As the International
Coaching Federation (https://coachingfederation.org/about) defines, coaching
involves, “partnering with clients in a thought-provoking and creative process
that inspires them to maximize their personal and professional potential”.
Finally, towards the higher intensity and longer lasting portion of the spec-
trum, mentoring involves offering the learner guidance about long-term career
growth. As defined by the Association for Talent Development, “Mentoring is
a reciprocal and collaborative at will relationship that most often occurs
between a senior and junior employee for the purpose of the mentee’s growth,
learning and career development”. The practice of mentoring offers the learner
an experience with a focus on enculturation and values, character development,
socialization into the field, stories, and networking. Bersin (2021) further
makes the distinction between coaching and mentoring by acknowledging that
coaches serve more as teachers, guides, and helpful psychologists rather than an
advocate, which is a role more often found in a mentor. Unlike coaches,
mentors also tend to gain an advantage from their ongoing relationship with
their mentee, creating a mutually beneficial relationship for long-term career

development and professional movement (Reitman & Benatti, 2021).

As we move forward in these chapters, and given the overlap between
coaching and mentoring – we will focus more on setting up coaching which
can be further intensified by a longer duration and intensity of engagement
like mentorship.

Types of Coaches

AI Coaches. A specific type of coaching we explore in this work based on the
PLiF research is Artificially Intelligent (AI) coaches. AI coaches leverage deep
learning algorithms, machine learning data, and cognitive speech analytics to
provide feedback to learners about ways they might improve job skills pro-
viding, “a smartwatch for business relationships” (Bersin, 2021). Recognizing


130 Designing for Learner–Mentor, Coach, or AI Interaction

the challenge of scale, artificially intelligent coaches aim to provide coaching
resources for more employees without requiring intensive personnel
resources. While research suggests there may be times when human coaches
may be better suited to navigating longer-term career goals, aspirations, as
well as cultural challenges, researchers argue that AI coaches may be better
positioned to provide data-backed and consistent feedback. This can be
driven by the AI’s ongoing observations of users in digital environments and
based on the data-rich analytics enabled by these daily digital interactions
(Bersin, 2021; Luo, Qin, Fang, and Qu, 2021). AI coaching may also be
better positioned in large organizations wherein human coaching resources
are limited to the C-Suite or in instances where larger-scale coaching pro-
grams may be cost-prohibitive. Scale, ongoing data-driven touchpoints with
learners, and the democratization of coaching resources all serve as potential
advantages of implementing AI coaches (Bersin, 2021).

E-coaching. E-coaching is yet another approach towards structuring the
learner-coach, mentor, or AI interaction. Ribbers and Waringa (2015) argue
that e-coaching is defined by where the coaching takes place. These researchers
describe e-coaching as synonymous with “online coaching, remote coaching,
web coaching, cyber coaching, i-coaching, distance coaching, and virtual
coaching” (p. 5). They continue with an exploration of the software used to
conduct the coaching session (e.g., chat program, webcam-based, text-based,
and virtual communications or Voice over the Internet applications). Examples
of educational communication technologies which may enable coaching
include Microsoft Teams, Zoom, SMS texts, chatbots, and more. Ribbers and
Waringa (2015) ultimately define e-Coaching as, “… a non-hierarchical
development partnership between two parties separated by a geographical
distance, in which the learning and reflection process is conducted via both
analogue and virtual means” (p. 7). In this approach and unlike the types of
guiding relationships listed above, the distinction for e-coaching stems from
the modality of the environment where the coaching is conducted rather than
the nature of the relationship between coach and learner.

We continue with an exploration of the theoretical frameworks commonly
used in Workforce and adult coaching programs.

Theoretical Grounding in the Design of Coaching
Programs

Coaching programs tend to be grounded in different models and frameworks.
In the next few paragraphs, we will introduce a few of the different approaches


Designing for Learner–Mentor, Coach, or AI Interaction 131

to coaching programs that one may consider when designing a learner-coach,
mentor, or AI-coach interaction. It should be noted that this overview is by no
means a comprehensive review of existing coaching models and frameworks,
however, it may give readers a starting point when theoretically grounding the
design of coaching programs for their organizations.

Developed by Graham Alexander and popularized by Sir John Whitmore
(1988) and his colleagues, the GROW coaching model first appeared in the
book Coaching for Performance and continues to be one of the most widely
used models for coach training and teaching programs (Grant et al., 2010;
Panchal & Riddell, 2020; Seabrook, 2017; van Nieuwerburgh, 2014). The
GROW model includes the following elements: Goal setting (aspirations),
Reality checking (current situation, internal and external obstacles), Options
and alternative strategies or courses of action (possibilities, strengths,
resources), and what is to be done, when, by whom, and the Will to do it
(actions and accountability) (Whitmore, 2010). We will explore the GROW
framework in action in the section on AI coaching later in this chapter
(Terblanche, Molyn, Hann, & Nilssons, 2022).

In the GROW model, goal setting is critical. Once a specific goal has been
set, the learner is asked questions by the coach to explore their current reality
and what motivates the changes they are aiming to achieve. Through this line
of guided inquiry, coaches also seek to facilitate an awareness surrounding
the internal and external blockers that may impede the changes needed to
reach the learner’s goal. Seabrook (2017) makes the distinction here re-
garding the non-directive approach espoused by the GROW model and the
directive approach often applied in instructional coaching with results that
suggest that the non-directive means of inquiry may be more impactful in the
long term. This enables the participating learner the opportunity to explore
the problem space in their own way, facilitating the learner’s internalization
of the problem space.

In the options stage, learners are asked to brainstorm or envision alter-
native behaviors they may “try on” or self-experiments they would like to
pursue. They are also encouraged to consider internal or external support
that they can use to achieve their espoused goals. After acknowledging the
abundance of these support resources, the coach can assess what the learner is
actually looking to achieve based on their actions and the corresponding level
of accountability associated with those actions. At this point, the role of the
coach evolves to support and track future progress (Miller, 2020).

The impact of the GROW model is well documented and supports the
claims that it encourages higher work satisfaction, productivity, and per-
formance (Whitmore, 2010). For example, an implementation of a coaching


132 Designing for Learner–Mentor, Coach, or AI Interaction

program theoretically grounded in the GROW framework has successfully
increased assessments of perceived well-being and decreased reports of neg-
ative mental health symptoms for 109 school administrators in Southeast
Nigeria (Okorie et al., 2022). GROW has also been shown to support
positive learning experiences that support intentional teaching, personalized
support, and continuous improvement processes in professional development
for teachers (Seabrook, 2017).

While GROW is a popular coaching framework, critics espouse that it is
too rudimentary and lacks details on goal setting, concept internalization,
and the continued maintenance stages of coaching (Ribbers & Waringa,
2015). Another coaching framework that sought to enhance the GROW
coaching model was developed in 2002 by Whittleworth and Gilbert called
OSCAR (2002). This coaching model provides an acronym that stands for
Outcome or what the learner is hoping to journey towards, Situation or the
current starting point, Choices and consequences or the potential route
options, Actions or a detailed plan, as well as Review or progress tracking.
Focused on employee growth, this coaching model sought to arm managers
with the questions to keep the coaching process “focused, structured, and
time effective” (p. 39). The additional letter surrounding action being
brought forth in this model supports an adjusted focus on an action plan that
is more tangibly defined. Arguably, the action is assumed in the GROW
model as the final step. OSCAR, however, seeks to build upon the popular
GROW framework by further detailing the explicit steps that will be taken to
achieve the intended outcome. Others have argued that OSCAR offers a
more flexible approach to coaching which focuses on solutions rather than
analyzing problems (Institute of Leadership and Management, n.d.)

Another popular coaching model comes from the acronym WOOP or Wish,
Outcome, Obstacle, and Plan. Proposed by German psychologist Gabriele
Oettingen (2014), WOOP sought to integrate motivational theory with
coaching by leveraging a practice called mental contrasting. Leveraging this
practice, Oettingen promotes considering the goal, anticipating a positive out-
come, as well as considering the obstacles that could get in the way. After con-
sidering these factors, a plan can be formulated in response. Results from applying
WOOP include lowering stress in health care providers, improving time man-
agement for students in vocational business school programs, and improvements
in student outcomes (e.g., grades, time on task, and homework completion) for
school children (Duckworth, Kirby, Oettingen, 2013; Oettingen, Kappes,
Gutenberg, Gollwitzer, 2015; Saddawi-Konefka et al., 2017).

These coaching frameworks continue to evolve with more recent ap-
proaches focused on the application of appreciative, solutions-based, and


Designing for Learner–Mentor, Coach, or AI Interaction 133

cognitive behavioral coaching grounded in positive psychology (Ribbers &
Waringa, 2015). What seems consistent in each of these models is that a
goal, objective, or result is explicitly defined. Then strengths, tools, resources,
support as well as obstacles are identified. Next, action plans are developed,
monitored, evaluated, and periodically revisited to ensure that learners are
still on the right track. The monitoring, evaluation, and adjustment phases
are also important steps in self-reflection. Ultimately engagement with this
type of framework may support self-regulation which in turn prepares the
learner with the skills needed to internalize learnings and apply this frame-
work to their future goals (Barrato & Moneo, 2021; Mann et al, 2022;
Ribbers & Waringa, 2015).

Armed with the knowledge of different theoretical frameworks grounding
the design of popular coaching programs, we will continue with an ex-
ploration of design considerations for online and e-Coaching programs, AI
coaching, and further consider the overarching role of technology in the
learner-coach, mentor, or AI interaction.

Designing for Online and e-Coaching Programs

When it comes to the design of online and e-coaching programs, Ribbers and
Waringa (2015) outline different modalities of e-coaching, including
coaching via video link (video coaching), coaching by phone (telephone
coaching), coaching via chat program (chat coaching), and coaching via
email (email coaching). It is important to note that text (text coaching) is yet
another medium that might be employed.

As educational communication technologies evolve, other modalities may
also emerge in virtual reality and augmented reality. In these environments,
visual coaching alerts may be employed to support the development of new
habits, behaviors, mentalities, or practices. For instance, an AR app may
anticipate a lull in a learner’s schedule and serve up an article corresponding
to the content associated with a learner or employee’s upcoming meeting.
Another possibility is that AI could prompt the learner to take on newly
defined or desired behaviors within the user’s eyeglasses.

Ribbers and Waringa (2015) further differentiate e-Coaching from tradi-
tional face-to-face coaching by considering the following factors: visibility or
whether or not the coach and learner can see one another, proximity or
physical closeness, time (or whether the interaction is asynchronous, syn-
chronous, or diachronous), and means of expression or how the communi-
cation happens (e.g., written, spoken, etc.). It is also important to note that a


134 Designing for Learner–Mentor, Coach, or AI Interaction

mix of coaching modalities may be used to capitalize on the advantages and
address the disadvantages of the different approaches. One such program
leveraging multiple coaching modalities is explored in the next few paragraphs.
In  an attempt to address resident burnout in medical education programs,
Mann et al. (2022) conducted a follow-up qualitative study to investigate the
impact of their online group coaching program called Better Together. A
coaching program founded based on the Circumstances, Thoughts, Feelings,
Action, and Results (CTFAR) model, the program sought to provide re-
sidents a framework to enhance their resilience in the face of program
attrition and burnout. The program offered twice weekly live coaching calls
over Zoom (video coaching), unlimited written coaching via an anonymous
forum (chat coaching), and self-study modalities (e.g., videos and work-
sheets). The six-month voluntary online coaching program was piloted with
101 women residents and had shown statistically significant improvements in
perceptions surrounding emotional exhaustion, imposter syndrome, and self-

compassion compared to a control group.

The success of these results indicates the potential value of multiple
modalities in coaching approaches. For instance, the video coaching allowed
participants to synchronously speak and view one another from a remote
location. This provided learners with a flexible means of engaging with other
learners as well as their coach without leaving their houses. Challenges
associated with video coaching, however, include the necessity for fast, stable,
and reliable internet connections. The visibility of the learner may also be
restricted by the current camera set-up wherein important body language
cues may be less observable. Finally, in group scenarios, it is also difficult to
continue certain side conversations. For instance, a video-based coaching
engagement requires that individuals take turns while speaking. The con-
figuration of the call is less conducive to facilitating multiple conversations
compared to face-to-face coaching sessions.

This study also supported chat conversations wherein learners could
synchronously interact with remote coaches instantaneously using written
communications. Writing out the conversation has the added benefit of
allowing learners the chance to reflect and support cognitive and emotional
processing that can be saved and documented for future reflection compared
to the spoken word. Disadvantages of the approach include not being able to
see the other participant, potential misinterpretations, and the length of time
it takes to chat compared to a face-to-face or video-based coaching conver-
sation. The flow of conversation may also be disruptive due to distractions.
Finally, the e-coaching will also be dependent on the language and writing
skills of the coach and learner.


Designing for Learner–Mentor, Coach, or AI Interaction 135

Leveraging both video and chat coaching, the Better Together researchers
sought to understand participant impressions and perceptions of the
coaching resources following the completion of the program. Themes that
emerged from 17 interviews included evidence of healthy coping strategies
based on the learner’s application of the CTFAR model, a perceived positive
and ongoing impact on the learner’s sense of being part of a larger com-
munity, and an appreciation for the accessible and customizable program
design. The group-based coaching design, ability to solicit anonymous
coaching feedback, an application of a theoretical framework guided by vi-
deos, resources, and discussion all supported the success of this program by
providing flexible resources and frameworks, spaces to reflect, and the ability
to connect with other women medical residents facing similar challenges at
times and places that were convenient to the learners.

By integrating several e-Coaching modalities, Better together was able to
offer flexible spaces for facilitating the learner-coach, mentor, or AI inter-
action. Their approach capitalized on the advantages and disadvantages of
each modality by providing multiple avenues to obtain coaching feedback for
the learners.

Considerations for the Design of AI Coaches

As Bersin (2021) indicates there is a range of software applications that are
emerging in the sphere of AI coaching. One example is Cultivate, an AI-
driven digital coaching application that highlights and reflects back a
learners’ existing behaviors based on email and chat interactions. These in-
teractions provide and reflect back leadership or managerial insights that can
be used to help the learner keep track of how they are (or are not) engaging
with their teams. For example, with the move to remote work in 2020, Price
WaterHouse Cooper leveraged an AI coaching program through Cultivate to
foster better working relationships between their employees (Bersin, 2021).
Cultivate bubbled up insights on the frequency in which managers praised
their fellow teammates and employees or the number of times they
acknowledged or interacted with individual team members. The insights can
also reflect back when workers seem to be the most productive, encouraging
wellness and enhanced productivity. The outputs also acknowledge when a
worker or learner needs a psychological break. This tool, complemented by
other data to include 360-feedback, engagement surveys, and email content
can help learners become more aware of how they are treating others and get
a sense of how they might refocus their efforts to create more inclusive work


136 Designing for Learner–Mentor, Coach, or AI Interaction

environments, improve relationships, or coach struggling employees to better
outcomes.

Other examples of artificially intelligent coaches analyze language patterns
through natural language processing to help determine the best ways to connect
with other learners, employees, referrals, customers, or potential clients. One
such example, Cyrano.ai, is included in the use case section of this chapter.

One area of exploration for AI coaches is in what spaces this technology
may be most impactful compared to human coaches. To investigate this,
Luo, Qin, Fang, and Qu (2021) researched the impact of human and AI
coaches in a series of randomized field experiments in an organization with
429 sales representatives at two Fintech companies. The researchers were
interested in how the artificially intelligent coaches impacted the experience
of low, middle, and high performers and questioned whether or not the AI
coaches were helpful to all participants.

AI and human coaches were asked to review 100–125 sales calls for sales
feedback. In this initial analysis, the AI coach was able to detect more
mistakes and solutions compared to its human counterpart.

Leveraging purchase rate and survey data as baseline metrics, the re-
searchers found an inverted U-shaped pattern in performance gains, with
both the lower and higher-performing agents achieving significant increases
with the AI coach. Middle-of-the-road performers benefited the most from
the AI coach showing the highest increases in sales and satisfaction with the
coaching experience. These findings suggest that mid-level performers
benefited the most and were able to enhance their performance by applying
the lessons learned from the AI coaches to their work practice. While all
workers benefited from the use of the AI coach, the discrepancies between
middle versus lower and higher performers prompt new questions about
what might contribute to these differences. Survey data indicated that lower
performers were more overwhelmed compared to the other workers. The
survey also suggests that higher performers perceived higher levels of
resentment towards the AI coach compared to the other workers. In the
second iteration of the experiment, the researchers limited the AI feedback to
lower performers and found statistically significant differences in perform-
ances with the AI coach and lower reported levels of cognitive overload for
this group. In the final iteration of the experiment, researchers leveraged both
AI coaches and humans to support workers. In this experiment, coaches read
the AI-generated feedback and delivered it to the worker. Ultimately, this
research suggests that a hybrid use of both human and AI coaches provided
the best outcomes overall indicating a partnership between AI and human
coaches may be the best suited towards improved performance.


Designing for Learner–Mentor, Coach, or AI Interaction 137

In another exploration of the impact of AI coaches, Terblanche et al.
(2022) made the distinction between artificially narrow intelligence (ANI)
and artificial general intelligence (AGI). The researchers of this study were
interested in the impact of an artificially intelligent AI coach, VICI which
was specifically and narrowly built to encourage better outcomes for student
goal attainment. The researchers were specifically curious about VICI’s
ability to influence other important psychological dimensions to include
psychological well-being, resilience, and perceived stress in undergraduate
business students based in the United Kingdom. Survey data was collected
before, after, and 3 months following the use of VICI. The analysis revealed
that only goal attainment showed statistically significant improvements. The
results, however, suggest the efficacy of AI in improving specified coaching
outcomes in a scalable and inexpensive manner.

AI coaches have additionally been explored for their ability to optimize
team mental models within complex surgical environments introducing an
overlap between the human and the computer as partners in optimizing the
operational environment (Seo 2021). With the goal of mitigating any pre-
ventable errors, the AI coach was designed to evaluate and prompt team
members in two simulated team-based scenarios. The AI coach sought to
infer where there might be misalignment in the team’s mental models during
complex healthcare executions. Based on the researcher’s design, the AI
coach inferred misalignment and demonstrated a 75% recall for future
challenges which offers a promising start toward mitigating problems within
the operating room before they even happen. This use of the AI coach as a
just-in-time assistive device has also been seen in cars and industrial opera-
tions and may demonstrate another role of AI coaches in providing infor-
mation and guidance at a point of need within an operational environment.
Increased interest in leveraging AI coaches has prompted several papers
regarding theoretical frameworks for coaching at scale which beg important
questions regarding privacy, equity, and representation (Braee, Rucker,
Baglioone, Ameko, & Barnes, 2020; Terblanche, 2020; Terblanche, Molyn,

Haan, & Nilsson, 2022). We explore the design implications of these in the
paragraphs below.

Acknowledging the challenges associated with the design of artificially
intelligent coaches, Baee et al. (2020) proposed a reworked framework from
data science to be leveraged in the development of these support systems.
The researchers espouse that successful AI coaches must prioritize reliability,
fairness, engagement, and ethics.

The construct of reliability acknowledges that there are data pieces asso-
ciated with a students’ or employees’ profile that may not be known in the


138 Designing for Learner–Mentor, Coach, or AI Interaction

development of the AI coach. Missing data or sample bias may make rec-
ommendations from an AI coach less impactful without awareness or con-
sideration of factors such as wealth and/or culture. Many AI coaches also rely
on self reports as a means of evaluation, which can translate to errors based
on faulty user inputs or lacking a common vocabulary. An additional chal-
lenge stems from those who may seek to corrupt the AI coach. Internet trolls
have been known to subvert and corrupt AI chatbots with racist propaganda.
Instances like Microsoft’s Tay Chatbot demonstrate how bad actors can
impede the development of AI coaching technologies.

The construct of Fairness seeks to address concerns regarding disparate out-
comes. This is where representative sampling in the development of the AI coach
becomes critical for ensuring positive experiences. For example, basing all of the
user research on male audiences may bias the abilities of the AI coach toward
behaviors that may not be as useful towards women. You may over-treat one
population or under-treat another, without consideration for the audience you are
seeking to support. Fairness is also a consideration when defining metrics asso-
ciated with the AI coach’s success. As Obermeyer and Mullainathan (2019) found,
a focus on cost may translate to worse outcomes for one group over another.

Engagement within this framework alludes to the motivational, attitu-
dinal, and attentional aspects of the AI coaches’ design. The key consider-
ation in engagement is to ensure that the AI coach provides enough value
and is designed in a way to encourage use. For example, too many alerts may
translate to cognitive overload for the end user and a perception that the
coach is a nuisance. Too few may stop the user from creating a practice of
using the AI coach. Gamification as well as short and long-term planning
may help facilitate ongoing interaction.

Finally, ethics, or the impact of technology on society, is a critical con-
sideration throughout all systems designs. Sample selection, privacy, data
storage, data ownership and how data is reported and presented all pose
important ethical questions for developers, designers, and researchers of AI
coaches. Are the populations used to test the AI coach considered vulnerable?
Who owns the data associated with the interactions between the individual
and coach? Where is the data kept? What data might be sensitive or
destructive if hacked or leaked? It is particularly important to conceive of
how to frame less desirable outcomes for end users. For example, a recent
interface design of Fintech brokerage Robinhood prompted 19-year-old Alex
Kearns to commit suicide given his belief that he owed hundreds of thou-
sands of dollars for stock market losses (Dokoupil et al., 2021). While all
systems may have unintended consequences, we have an obligation as
designers to explore how interpretation may influence human behaviors.


Designing for Learner–Mentor, Coach, or AI Interaction 139

Role of Technology

The table below only focuses on four types of guidance in the learner-coach,
mentor, or AI interaction in the PLiF framework. As we can see here, two
technology classifications supported by the learner-coach, mentor, or AI
coaching interaction include collaboration and communication as well as
assessment and analytics tools.

Collaboration and communication tools here are essential for allowing
for the 1 to 1 or the mix of 1 to 1 and 1 to N interactions. In the table
below, it is notable to see how the use of the tools differs. For example,
human-based interactions tend to focus on communication and collabo-
ration technology classifications whereas AI coaching is more aligned with
providing assessment and analytic capabilities. We also saw in this chapter,
how researchers are beginning to experiment with a hybrid mix of AI and
human coaches to leverage the scalable powers of AI while also capitalizing
on the emotional intelligence of humans (Luo et al., 2021) (Figure 7.1)
(Table 7.1).

Figure 7.1 Technology Categories.


140 Designing for Learner–Mentor, Coach, or AI Interaction

Table 7.1 Technology Recommendations Based on Type of Guidance


Type of
Guidance

Technologies  Optimized For …    Technology

Classifications


Mentoring  Zoom, Microsoft

Teams, Slack,
SMS Text

Long-term networking
relationships

Collaboration and
Communication


Online/In-
Person
Coaching

Zoom, Microsoft
Teams, Slack,
SMS Text

Supporting progress
toward defined goals

Collaboration and
Communication


AI coaching Cultivate,

Torch.io,
Cyrano.ai, Vici

Scaling coaching
solutions. Bubbling up
ongoing observations
based on digitally
based conversations,
meetings, and emails.

Assessment and
Analytics

Designing Coaching and Mentoring Programs
Using Train the Trainer Model

The “Train The Trainer” model is a training framework intended to engage
master trainers in coaching new trainers that are less experienced with a
particular topic or skill, or with training overall (https://www.cdc.gov/
healthyschools/trainingtools.htm). It serves as an internal training program
that          has the ability to help ensure that your employees are learning and
acquiring all of the skills, knowledge, and insight they need to perform their
jobs well and it does this through coaching and mentoring. Supportive
instructional strategies are strategies typically enacted by the expert, coach,
mentor, instructor, or embedded AI agent or performance support system,
with the goal of modeling the desired performance, skill, or process, and
observing and supporting learners during their implementation of a learning
task. In this approach, coaching consists of observing or monitoring learner
performance when completing a task and offering hints, feedback,
and modeling to bring learner performance closer to expert performance
(Collins & Kapur, 2014). So how can the train-the-trainer model support
learner-coach, mentoring, and AI interactions? Let’s consider this workplace
training example in which an online apprenticeship program was developed
to train corporate team members in the Appreciative Inquiry.

A large pharmaceutical company is transitioning to a more flexible em-
ployee development model called Appreciative Inquiry. Before transitioning


Designing for Learner–Mentor, Coach, or AI Interaction 141

to this new methodology, company employees were members of small work
teams that moved through a traditional development process of identifying
problems and developing solutions without much authority or influence
because team members expected leaders and project managers to make final
decisions. This traditional employee development curriculum did not reflect
the new management style needed to cope with shifting priorities, matrixed
responsibilities, and short production deadlines, hence a more flexible em-
ployee development methodology called Appreciative Inquiry was instituted
at the company.

In order to redefine roles across the organization, new teams were formed
so that team members could be groomed to hold the position of team leader
or project manager in their respective departments. These team members
were matched with online coaches and mentors to help them develop expert-
level knowledge of the Appreciative Inquiry process. Multimedia resources
were made available for the learners to use to observe modeled examples of
the approach. Learners documented their attempts to apply the appreciative
inquiry model to their work situations through online journals, and sub-
mitted role-play videos for mentor and peer critique. They also participated
in developmental team projects and engaged in online discussions with their
peers. The goal was to allow these team members to internalize the skills of
experienced leaders and managers who can use the Appreciative Inquiry
process to build and support successful productive teams.

The Train-The-Trainer model engages learners in active and constructive
thinking processes through observation of expert performance, articulation,
and reflective practice. It also engages learners in goal-directed and regulatory
behavior as they seek to become experts in their own right. And thirdly, it
engages learners in collaborative and conversational activities as they seek
help, guidance, and support from experts, coaches, mentors, and peers.

Case Study/Use Case: Cyrano.ai

Named after the French play written in 1897, the original purpose of
Cyrano.ai was to use AI to analyze and enhance conversations between ther-
apists and their youthful patients. The tool was developed to address the threat
of suicide, the second most common cause of death for teenagers. Built spe-
cifically with the aim to offer free psychological and mental health resources to
at-risk adolescents, Cyrano.ai was designed as a scalable solution to analyze
adolescent and therapist conversations to encourage more meaningful dia-
logue. Cyrano.ai does this by scaling data analytics for coaching and psychiatric


142 Designing for Learner–Mentor, Coach, or AI Interaction

professionals with the aim of offering free mental health resources to troubled
teens. To fund this enterprise, Cyrano.ai also offers an enterprise suite of in-
sights specifically for sales representatives to strategically leverage conversation
as a mechanism for emotional change (Limon & Plaster, 2022). This, in turn,
also builds a database of natural language processing (NLP) model for analysis,
fueling future insights on how one might structure conversations to be the
most impactful depending on the end user. As Baee et al. (2020) point out, the
distinctions between young adults and salespeople will be critical to investigate
and understand in order to enhance the reliability and ethics of the tool.

Founded by former Executive Director and CEO of a medical health
clinic, Scott Sandland founded Cyrano.ai due to his in-depth experience with
troubled teenagers. He felt that many of the existing personality-driven as-
sessments of AI coaching were limited and did not take into account the
myriad of factors that might drive behaviors. Instead, Sandland has worked
with his team to develop machine learning algorithms that analyze NLP to
detect an employee or client’s desires, abilities, reasoning, needs, and assessed
commitment. These factors help guide how messages could be crafted and
what strategies might work best for the collaboration or to foster a better
working relationship.

In a recorded session, a Cyrano report provides insight into the conver-
sational commitment of different stakeholders (e.g., compelled, focused, or
curious), priorities (e.g., data, instinct, community, etc.), and preferred type
of communication styles (e.g., visual, auditory, or kinesthetic). In each
report, the service also offers actionable suggestions on how best to com-
municate, follow-up, and work with the other person based on the obser-
vations the artificially intelligent analysis makes. Users of Cyrano.ai can then
leverage the insights to better frame, propose, or pitch solutions enhancing
collaborative partnerships and garnering enhanced business outcomes to
include 26% increases in sales and 44% increases in efficiency at a Metro
Honda car dealership according to their site.

References

Barrato, J. B., & Moneo, M. R. (2021). Can coaching contribute to the development of
self-regulation? Similarities and differences between these two processes. Coaching: An
International Journal of Theory, Research, and Practice, 15(2), 166–179. https://www.
tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/17521882.2021.1929362

Bersin, J. (2021). AI-enabled coaching is hot. And there’s lots more to come. Bersin
Research. https://joshbersin.com/2021/07/ai-enabled-coaching-is-hot-and-theres-lots-
more-to-come/


Designing for Learner–Mentor, Coach, or AI Interaction 143

Baee, S., Rucker, M., Baglione, A., Ameko, M. K., & Barnes, L. (2020). A framework for
addressing the risks and opportunities in AI-supported virtual health coaches.
Proceedings of the PervasiveHealth Conference.

Collins, Allan, & Kapur, Manu. (2014). Cognitive apprenticeship. In The Cambridge
Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 109–127). 10.1017/cbo9781139519526.008
Dokoupil, T., Kaplan, M., Finn, M., McDonald, C., Kamin, J., & Kaplan, R. (2021,
February 8). Alex Kearns died thinking he owed hundreds of thousands for stock market
losses  on Robinhood. His parents have sued over his suicide. CBS News. https://www.

cbsnews.com/news/alex-kearns-robinhood-trader-suicide-wrongful-death-suit/
Duckworth, A. L., Kirby, T. A., Gollwitzer, A., & Oettingen, G. (2013). From fantasy to

action: Mental contrasting with implementation intentions (MCII) improves aca-
demic performance in children. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 4(6),
745–753.  https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/01443410.2010.506003?
journalCode=cedp20&src=recsys

Grant, A. M., Green, L. S., & Rynsaardt, J. (2010). Developmental coaching for high
school teachers: Executive coaching goes to school. Consulting Psychology Journal, 62
(3), 151–168.

Institute of Leadership and Management (n.d.). Introduction of OSCAR [YouTube
Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DGp3whqYY1Y

Limon, D. & Plaster, B. (2022, January 25). Can AI teach us how to become more
emotionally intelligent? Harvard Business Review. https://hbr.org/2022/01/can-ai-
teach-us-how-to-become-more-emotionally-intelligent

Luo, X. Qin, M. S., Fang, Z., & Qu, Z. (2021). Artificial intelligence coaches for sale
agents: Caveats and solutions. Journal of Marketing, 85(2), 14–32. 10.1177/0022242
920956676

Mann, A., Fainstad, T., Shah, P., Dieujust, N., Thurmon, K., dunbar, K., Jones, C.
(2022). “We’re all going though it”: Impact off an online group coaching program for
medical trainees: A aualitative analysis. BMC Medical Education, 22. doi: 10.1186/s12
909-022-03729-5

Marcdante, K., & Simpson, D. (2018). Choosing when to advise, coach, or mentor. Journal
of Graduate Medical Education, 10(2), 227–228. 10.4300/JGME-D-18-00111.1

Miller, K. (2020, April 3). What is the GROW coaching model (incl. examples). Positive
Psychology. https://positivepsychology.com/grow-coaching-model/

Obermeyer, Z. & Mullainathan, S. (2019). Dissecting racial bias in an algorithm used to
manage the health of populations. Science, 366(6464), 447–453. doi: 10.1126/
science.aax2342

Oettingen, G. (2014, October 27). Stop being so positive. Harvard Business Review. https://
hbr.org/2014/10/stop-being-so-positive

Oettingen, G., Kappes, H. B., Gutenberg, K. B., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (2015). Self-
regulation of time management: Mental contrasting with implementation intentions.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 45(2), 218–229. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1002/ejsp.2090

Okorie, C., Ogba, F. N., Amujiri, B. A., Nwankwo, F. M., Oforka, T. O., Igu, C. N., …
& Iwuala, H. O. (2022). Zoom-based GROW coaching intervention for improving
subjective well-being in a sample of school administrators: A randomized control trial.
Internet Interventions, 29, 10.1016/j.invent.2022.100549


144 Designing for Learner–Mentor, Coach, or AI Interaction

Panchal, S., & Riddell, P. (2020). The GROWS model: Extending the GROW coaching
model to support behavioural change. The Coaching Psychologist, 16(2), 12–25.

Reitman, A., & Benatti, S.(2021, March 26). Mentoring vs. Coaching. ATD. https://www.
td.org/insights/mentoring-versus-coaching-whats-the-difference

Ribbers, A., & Waringa, A. (2015). E-coaching: Theory and practice for a new online
approach to coaching. Oxon: Routledge.

Saddawi-Konefka, D., Baker, K., Guarino, A., Burns, S. M., Oettingen,G., Gollwitzer,

P. M., & Charnin, J. E. (2017). Changing resident physician studying behaviors: A
randomized, comparative effectiveness trial of goal setting versus use of WOOP. Journal
of Graduate Medical Education, 9(4), 451–457. DOI: 10.4300/JGME-D-16-00703.1

Seo, S., Kennedy-Metz, L. R., Zenati, M. A., Shah, J. A., Dias, R. D., & Unhelkar, V. V.
(2021). Towards an AI coach to infer team mental model alignment in healthcare.
2021 IEEE Conference on Cognitive and Computational Aspects of Situation
Management (CogSIMA) (pp. 39–44), doi: 10.1109/CogSIMA51574.2021.9475925

Seabrook, L. (2017). Exploring teachers’ perceptions of the GROW coaching model.

ProQuest Dissertations Publishing.

Terblanche, N. (2020). A design framework to create artificial coaches. International
Journal of Evidence Based Coaching and Mentoring, 18(2), 152–165.

Terblanche, N., Molyn, J., Haan, E., Nilsson, V. O. (2022). Comparing artificial
intelligence and human coaching goal attainment efficacy. PLOS One. 10.1371/
journal.pone.0270255

van Nieuwerburgh, C. (2014). An introduction to coaching skills: A practical guide. Sage
Publications Ltd.

Whitmore, J. (1988, 1992, 2002, 2010). Coaching for performance: Growing people, per-
formance and purpose. London: Nicholas Brealey Publishing.


Designing for          8

Learner–Social Network

Interaction

Figure 8.0 Learner to Social Network or COP Interaction.

Overview of Learner-Social Network Interaction

In Chapter 3, we defined learner-social network interaction as a type of
interaction that reflects the acceptance of “the network or community of peers”

DOI: 10.4324/9781003121008-8


146 Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction

as a dimension of personalized learning. The term social network or social
networking stems from a class of technologies known as social software, social
media, or Web 2.0 technology. As described in Chapter 3, Web 2.0 technology
is “read-write” technology because it allows users not only to read from the
Web but also to share their own content freely, easily, and widely. More
importantly, Web 2.0 has been characterized as the “The Social Web” and
described as the second stage of Internet growth that is all about “connecting
people” in contrast to “connecting information” (Davis, 2008). So Web 2.0
technology is more than a set of cool and new technologies and services and the
so-called “network effect” that more than a billion Internet users are producing
is changing the way people interact, do business, and learn (Anderson, 2007).
When Web 2.0 pioneers and influencers were queried about how they would
define Web 2.0 technology, different perspectives emerged as expected, how-
ever, what stood out were overarching themes such as openness, personal ex-
perience, software as a service, user-generated content, the people’s Web, social
networking, social media, grassroots movement, read/write Web, the wisdom
of the crowds, and others (Jones, 2008).

The social side of Web 2.0 was emphasized by EDUCAUSE (http://www.
educause.edu/) (a nonprofit association whose mission is to advance higher
education by promoting the intelligent use of information technology) in
2007. Specifically, the concepts of user-created content and social net-
working were highlighted as new trends that will have a significant impact on
college and university campus learning environments (Kitsantas & Dabbagh,
2010). Due in part to this emphasis, the term social software (or social
media) has become more commonplace in higher education than the term
Web 2.0. Additionally, educational researchers and practitioners have further
delineated some of the social affordances or attributes of Web 2.0 technol-
ogies as (a) establishing group identity and personal reputations, (b) building
social contexts of knowledge, (c) enabling personalization, and (d) erecting
recommendation and folk knowledge systems (also called folksonomies)
(Dabbagh & Reo, 2011). For example, social networking sites such as
Facebook and LinkedIn enable members to post personal and professional
information (e.g., a resume or CV) and to connect to other professionals and
friends with similar interests and skills, forming a personalized network.
Members of these social networks can also ask for endorsements or recom-
mendations from others within their personalized network to establish per-
sonal reputation systems. Moreover, employers who become part of the
network as individuals can look for specialized talent within this “folk”
knowledge system that is entirely built and driven by its members (hence the
word folksonomy).


Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction 147

Social media has also gained ground in the workplace and has been shifting
learning from formal to informal, from individualistic to collectivistic, and from
top-down to bottom-up (Dabbagh et al., 2016). The transfer of knowledge
through social media has become more fluid between individuals in the same
organization or even in the same field, resulting in virtual Communities of
Practice (CoPs or vCOPs). These digital learning practices are further described
as knowledge maturing, since they afford a more informal, collective sense of
learning in the workplace (Freifeld, 2013; Ravenscroft et al., 2012). Different
social media technologies such as blogs, microblogs, social bookmarking tools,
and wikis are being used in corporate environments and their use has demon-
strated a positive impact on work performance (Leftheriotis & Giannakos,
2014). Further, research has suggested that workers who use social media on the
job have a higher chance of engaging in learning activities than those who do not
(Puijenbroek, Poell, Kroon & Timmerman, 2014).

Overall, Web 2.0 technology and in particular social media has changed
the nature of social interaction rendering the learner-social interaction
dimension of the Personalized Learning framework (PLiF) a critical com-
ponent of personalized learning that has major implications for higher
education and workplace learning contexts. More specifically, Web 2.0
technology has enabled an unprecedented opportunity to enact the funda-
mental principle of learning as a social process which is based on the concept
that knowledge is always under construction (fluid, dynamic) and acquired
through enculturation into a community of practice (Dabbagh & Bannan-
Ritland, 2005). As posited by Stodd and Reitz (2019):

Social learning (in contrast to formal learning) is a story largely written by
the learners, themselves. It’s about tacit, tribal, and lived wisdom that
exists within distributed communities. It’s often untidy, diverse, and deeply
personal, as people bring their own perspectives and experiences into the
learning space (p. 269).

Another definition of social learning that is equally pertinent for this
dimension of PLiF is provided by Sol, Beers, and Wals (2013) who define
social learning as “an interactive and dynamic process in a multi-actor setting
where knowledge is exchanged and where actors learn by interaction and co-
create new knowledge in on-going interaction” (p. 37).

Given these definitions, the question becomes what are the social systems
or networks that support learner-to-social network interaction? We identify
two such networks for this chapter: Communities of Practice (COP) and
Personal Learning Networks (PLN). We describe each social system next.


148 Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction

Communities of Practice

Communities of Practice or COP exemplify social networking or social
interaction. The premise is that when enough people begin using a particular
social software tool, or interacting (sharing and aggregating) in an online
community, the value of the network increases for everyone involved and a
multiplier dynamic can set in that escalates the benefits of the service for all
(Dabbagh & Reo, 2011). Communities of practice are “groups of people
informally bound together by shared expertise and passion for a joint en-
terprise” (Wenger & Snyder, 2000, p. 139). The construct has become
popular in the business community and in organizations that focus on
knowledge as intellectual capital.

COPs are formed when members of a community are united by a common
purpose and engage in mutual activities, mediating common values, interests,
and goals. Specifically, there are three main elements that must be present for
COPs to develop, 1) Commitment to a shared domain, 2) Engagement as a
community, and 3) A shared practice and dedication to new knowledge
(Wenger-Trayner & Wenger-Trayner, 2014). COPs are successful only when
these   three characteristics are present and cultivated together. Thus COPs can
be described as shared environments that permit sustained exploration by
members enabling them to understand the kinds of problems that experts in
various areas encounter and the knowledge that these experts use as tools to
solve problems of practice. Web 2.0 technology has enabled the formation of
COPs as social networks that include novices and experts as participants who
interact with each other to build a reciprocal interchange of ideas, data, and
opinions using collaboration and communication technologies. Transformative
styles of communication are characteristic in a COP, which means that the
contributor, the participator, and the lurker (receiver) are changed (trans-
formed from novice to expert) as they share in the goal of learning and
knowledge generation and application. The purpose of a COP is to develop
members’ abilities and skills and to build and exchange knowledge in a relevant
and meaningful context and a supportive learning environment. The following
are the instructional characteristics of COP:

•  Control of learning is distributed among the participants in the
community and is not in the hands of a single instructor or expert.

•  Participants are committed to the generation and sharing of new
knowledge.

•  Learning activities are flexible and negotiated.


Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction 149

•  The participants exhibit high levels of dialogue, interaction, collabora-
tion, and social negotiation.

•  A shared goal, problem, or project binds the participants and provides a
common focus and an incentive to work together as a community.

•  Diversity, multiple perspectives, and epistemic issues are appreciated.

•  Traditional disciplinary and conceptual boundaries are crossed.

•  Innovation and creativity are encouraged and supported.

Communities of practice are different from formal work groups or project
teams in that they are defined by knowledge rather than task, and members
are self-selecting rather than assigned by a higher authority. Interaction
between the Learner and the COP is seen as involving peers outside of the
organizational context. This offers learners the opportunity to leverage the
insights  of those who are dealing with similar challenges but in different use
cases. Exposure to ideas outside of the employee’s organizational context may
offer new ideas for approaching internal problems. In a COP, learning is a
shared endeavor among the members of the community rather than some-
thing that is controlled by a single instructor or expert. In this way, learning
activities are collaborative, flexible, and diverse. The participants are com-
mitted to generating and sharing new knowledge for a common purpose
through “high-levels of dialogue, interaction, collaboration, and social
negotiation” (Dabbagh & Bannan-Ritland, 2005, p. 8). Cambridge and
Suter (2005) describe COPs as “dynamic social structures that require
‘cultivation’ so that they can emerge and grow” (p. 1). Organizations and
individuals can facilitate the formation of a COP through planned activities
and  by creating a community environment. However, it is the members of
the community that keep it flourishing over time.

Who is Doing It

Communities of Practice are utilized in a variety of settings including,
education, professional organizations, communities, governments, corpora-
tions, health and social care, and businesses (profit or non-profit) all over the
world. Most organizations, whether related to business, education, or gov-
ernment, rely on some form of COP as a resource for collaboration and
improvement (Wenger-Trayner & Wenger-Trayner, 2014). COPs work well
in professional settings because there is no formal teacher-leading instruction.
Instead, COPs consist of both novices and experts sharing knowledge to
advance their interests or shared goal. COPs are especially useful in a


150 Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction

professional setting because they enable practitioners to take collective
responsibility for managing the knowledge they need, create a direct link
between learning and performance, and are not limited by formal structures.
This is especially evident in government contexts where COPs are formed to
solve problems related to education, health, and security (Wenger-Trayner &
Wenger-Trayner, 2014). However, in more traditional hierarchical organi-
zations where collaboration among workers is not valued, it can be chal-
lenging to create a true COP. In education, COPs are useful in teacher
training or connecting administrators to other colleagues. COPs can go
beyond internal organizational communities by connecting professionals
across a specific domain.

Examples of COP

A really great example of COP is professional technical organizations like the
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) (https://www.ieee.
org/). According to IEEE (2022), it is the world’s largest technical profes-
sional organization with a diverse membership of software engineers, com-
puter scientists, information technology professionals, physicists, medical
doctors, and of course all types of engineers (chemical, materials, mechanical,
civil, electric, etc.). The common learning goal or purpose of this COP since
its inception in 1884, is to support professionals in these related disciplines
for the greater good of humanity.

Another great example of COP is the American Geophysical Union’s
(AGU)  Thriving  Earth  Exchange  (https://thrivingearthexchange.org/).
Thriving Earth Exchange or TEE is an example of a successful COP whose
goal is to strengthen and enhance collaboration among communities, sci-
entists, and partner organizations so that all communities can build healthy,
resilient, thriving, just, and ecologically responsible futures. The TEE (n.d.)
believes that “community science” happens when citizens and scientists work
together by “defining questions, designing protocols, collecting and ana-
lyzing data, and using scientific knowledge in decision-making” (about page).
The Thriving Earth Exchange program “connects communities with scien-
tists and supports them as they work together to tackle local challenges
related to natural hazards, natural resources, and climate change” (about
page). Through TEE, scientists are able to commit to helping local en-
vironmental projects submitted by citizens. This creates a community with a
single focus to make an environmental impact and “do science together”
(about page). Additionally, the TEE facilitates collaboration and interaction


Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction 151

among community members, scientists, and sponsors. The TEE cultivates
the three necessary characteristics of COP: (1) members of the TEE have a
commitment to the shared interest of tackling local environmental issues,

(b) interact regularly through their website, blog, webinars, Twitter, and the
Community Science Exchange, and (3) are committed to working together
scientifically to make a positive impact on a community.

Personal Learning Networks

In order to understand Personal Learning Networks (PLNs) as a social
network that supports learner-to-social network interaction, we must first
understand what a Personal Learning Environment or PLE is. The concept
of PLE, described in chapter 2, dates back to as early as 1976 but the modern
concept of the PLE dates back to 2005 with the spread of the use of social
media technologies and the exploration of their possibilities to enrich the
traditional Virtual Learning Environment or VLE (van-Harmelen, 2008).
More specifically, a PLE can be described as a learning environment that is
largely facilitated by cloud-based Web 2.0 technologies and services designed
to help learners create, organize and share content, participate in collective
knowledge generation, and manage their own meaning-making (Dabbagh &
Castaneda, 2020). Hence, from a technological perspective, a PLE is a self-
driven digital learning space that is unique to its maker, author, or initiator,
and composed of one or more technological artifacts, tools, or platforms.
These include experience and resource-sharing tools, social networking tools,
and mobile and immersive technologies that put the “I” in user interface and
the “We” into webs of social participation emphasizing the sociotechnical or
socio-technological nature of the PLE (Davis, 2008). Essentially, the PLE is
not a collection of new software, rather, it is a new approach to using
technologies for learning (Attwell, 2007).

Dabbagh and Reo (2011) developed a three-level framework for social
media use that allows learners to develop a PLE by tapping into the affor-
dances of social media and gradually activating the features of the social
media tool to enable the degree of interaction and sharing desired for
learning in an e-Learning context. Level 1 of this framework is Personal
Information Management. Level 1 is the lowest level of social interactivity
in which the learner uses social media to develop and manage personal
information without activating any of the social sharing or networking fea-
tures the tools provide and does not have an observable presence on the
“grid”, so to speak. Learners may “pull in” other people’s content from the


152 Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction

cloud but the goal is to create a private learning environment rather than
sharing self-generated content with others. The focus is on managing private
information for personal productivity or e-learning tasks such as online
bookmarks, multimedia archives, and personal journals and writing.

Level 2 of the framework is Basic Interaction or Sharing. This level
embraces the users’ capacity for communication, social interaction, and
collaboration via social media. This is where learners can activate the built-in
features of social media that enable social interaction through various strat-
egies such as (a) expressing individual identity, (b) gaining awareness of the
presence of others, (c) engaging in conversations, (d) establishing relation-
ships, (e) forming groups and reputations, and (f) sharing experiences and
resources publicly (Butterfield, 2003; Sessums, 2006). Collectively, this
behavior helps foster a nascent culture of knowledge sharing and can spawn
relatively small common interest networks and groups. This is where the
learner starts to build a Personal Learning Network or PLN.

Level 3 of the framework is Social Networking. Social networking, as
described earlier in this chapter, corresponds to the highest degree of social
interaction. At this level of the framework, learners are using social media to
foster informal learning communities based on the knowledge topics or
content they are seeking, thereby extending the PLE from a personal learning
space to a social learning space or Personal Learning Network (PLN). The
mechanism that directs this process is known as the network effect as
mentioned earlier. So personal learning networks or PLNs develop as in-
dividuals freely and intentionally connect with those interested in the topic
under study in order to collaborate and learn collectively, thereby estab-
lishing a personalized learner-social network interaction.

Putting it more simply, PLNs are “the people we connect to in order to
learn from, collaborate with, or be inspired by” (Jackson, 2015). Jarche
(2014) developed a set of processes known as Personal Knowledge Mastery
(PKM) to help learners develop effective PLNs. The aim is to empower
individuals to take charge of their personal and professional development
through a continuous process of seeking, sensing-making, and sharing (see
Figure 8.1). Similar to Dabbagh and Reo’s (2011) three-level framework of
social media use, Jarche’s PKM has three stages. First is seeking, which
involves finding things out and keeping up to date. In other words exploring,
filtering, curating, and pulling resources (from trusted sources) related to the
skill or knowledge the individual wishes to learn about. Then comes sensing,
which is how we personalize or process information and use it. This includes
reflecting on the information we gathered in the seeking phase, connecting it
to our own understandings, and putting it into practice. Then comes


Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction 153

Figure 8.1 Personal Knowledge Mastery (PKM) Framework.

sharing which includes exchanging resources, ideas, and experiences with
our networks as well as collaborating with our colleagues.

As illustrated in Figure 8.1, seeking, sensing, and sharing are continuous
processes that can start in a PLN, extend to a COP, and result in a work
team where the knowledge is applied in the organization to improve per-
formance. The process is then continued to see how well the application
worked, and how it can be improved, sharing experiences and new practices
along the way. Capturing and sharing information can increase the frequency
of serendipitous connections, inside and outside the organization and across
disciplines where real innovation happens. As I think about how PKM
processes can help an individual develop an effective PLN, an example comes
to mind. Using my PLN on Twitter, I discovered a thread that talked about
OpenAI’s chatGPT (https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/), a chatbot that
optimizes language models for dialogue. I was browsing my Twitter feed (my
PLN/social network) and saw a thread from a trusted source mentioning
chatGPT and how it is going to impact the college essay. This was my
“seeking” stage of PKM. I then shared this new knowledge with doctoral
students in a class I was teaching and we engaged in a discussion on what this
means to the teaching of writing skills. This was my “sensing” stage. Then I
circled back to the “seeking” stage to seek more information on chatGPT
and found out that some educators are already using chatGPT in their
writing assignments in novel ways. Now I wish to circle back to the “sensing”


154 Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction

stage to test ideas of how educators can develop formal applications that
integrate chatGPT meaningfully in writing assignments. I will seek a COP
that has expertise in this knowledge domain in order to test this new idea.
Once this is accomplished, I can share the application with colleagues in my
college or department (work team) so that we can integrate this into the
curriculum.

Jarche (2014) argues that in addition to seeking, sensing, and sharing, we
need to become adept at filtering information as well as discerning when and
with whom to share. Like any skill, these require practice and feedback.
Much of this can be provided in COPs, which Jarche considers a halfway
space between work teams and social networks, where trusted relationships
can form that enable people to share knowledge more openly. Connecting
social networks, COPs and work teams is important for integrating learning
and working in the network era.

A Personal Learning Network (PLN) can be seen as one’s gateway to con-
tinuous learning, exchange of thoughts and ideas, validation of one’s thoughts
and insights on challenges encountered, and involvement in the process of
continuous inquiry and exploration on topics that matter (Chattopadhyay,
2016). As Couros and Hildebrandt (2016) suggest, “PLNs can be critical for
sustained long-term learning, for students and facilitators alike” (p. 157). In
today’s climate of continuous change, it is not possible for an organization to
provide training for every conceivable skill that may be required, particularly
when these skills are emergent (Chattopadhyay, 2016). Moreover, the rapidity
of change makes ongoing efforts to reskill and retool even more critical to
modern-day workers. Workers must be ready to adapt quickly to new contexts
triggered by technological advancements, to reskill continuously, and to
integrate learning into every facet of their jobs (Dabbagh & Castaneda, 2020).
That is why it is extremely critical that individuals take control of their own
professional development by developing PLEs and PLNs and using PKM to
engage in continuous and lifelong learning.

Designing Learner-Social Network Interaction

Creating, developing, or designing communities of practice (COP), personal
learning environments (PLE), or personal learning networks (PLN) is not an
easy task given that these learning spaces are self-driven, informal, and
composed of one or more technological artifacts, social media tools, or
platforms. More importantly, these learning spaces place the responsibility
for organizing learning on the individual. Hence learners need support,


Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction 155

guidance, and pedagogical interventions to make the best possible use of
social media to support their learning goals and effectively engage in learner-
social network interaction. Instructional strategies that can be used to sup-
port the design and implementation of COPs and PLNs belong to a class of
strategies known as supportive instructional strategies (Dabbagh, et al.,
2019). Supportive instructional strategies are “strategies typically enacted by
the expert, coach, mentor, instructor, or embedded performance support
system, with the goal of modeling the desired performance, skill, or process,
and observing and supporting learners during their implementation of a
learning task” (Dabbagh et al., 2019, p. 29). Supportive instructional
strategies include scaffolding, modeling and explaining, and coaching and
mentoring.

Scaffolding can support learner to social-network interaction in the fol-
lowing ways: first the interaction between the learner and the instructor,
mentor, expert, coach, or instructional system is collaborative and conver-
sational; second, the learner’s intentions are at the forefront of the learning
task supporting goal-directed behavior; third, the learner is challenged to
perform beyond his or her comfort zone enabling active and constructive
learning; and fourth, scaffolding eventually enables the learner to indepen-
dently complete the learning task promoting self-directed and self-regulated
learning. Stodd and Reitz (2019) propose a “scaffolded social learning”
approach or design methodology that creates a loose structure within which
learning communities carry out “sense making” activities while engaging
with both formal and informal social knowledge. This design methodology
involves creating learning experiences across all modalities of the learning
spectrum to include formal, social, and individual learning, and using a range
of learning facilitators to include community managers, storytellers, coaches,
and social leaders. Distributing learning modalities and learning facilitators
helps maintain the momentum of social learning and drives up engagement.
Modeling and explaining is another supportive instructional strategy that
can be used to support learners in COPs or PLNs. Modeling and explaining
are time-tested instructional strategies made most evident in apprenticeship
learning. Apprenticeship learning emphasizes “showing and telling” where
showing is the modeling strategy and telling is the explaining strategy.
Essentially, modeling shows how a process unfolds, while explaining involves
giving reasons why it happens that way. Integrating both the demonstration
and explanation during social learning interactions is very useful for the
learner to see how a process is handled. This has become increasingly easier
to implement given video technology. Modeling and explaining support
social learning in the following ways: first it engages learners in active


156 Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction

listening and questioning; second it presents concepts and domain knowl-
edge at their level of complexity through the use of authentic processes and
contextualized examples; and third it engages learners in constructive
thinking through observation, articulation, and reflection.

Coaching and mentoring can also be used to support learner-social network
interaction in COPs or PLNs. Coaching and mentoring are supportive
instructional strategies that are closely related. Coaching consists of observing
or monitoring learner performance when completing a task and offering hints,
feedback, and assistance to bring the performance closer to expert performance
(Collins & Kapur, 2014), while mentoring is providing expert advice and
support to assist learners in attaining goals and overcoming barriers and chal-
lenges, and serving as a role model. When implementing coaching and men-
toring strategies, it is important not to stifle learner exploration or goal-directed
behavior. This can easily happen when coaches or coaching systems provide too
much guidance too quickly. As Collins (2012) posited, a coach should only
provide assistance when real difficulties are encountered by the learner. In a
coaching relationship, the learner is responsible for setting the agenda and
content that will be covered during a coaching session and the coach is
responsible for managing and facilitating the session and helping the learner use
their own skills and resourcefulness to solve specific problems and overcome
challenges. Hence, coaching should be perceived as a collaborative process that
supports not only the enhancement of the learner’s performance or mastery of
skill but also the enhancement of the learner’s ability for self-directed learning,
self-confidence, and personal growth (Mihiotis & Argirou, 2016). Table 8.1
provides a snapshot of how supportive instructional strategies can be im-
plemented using learning technologies.

It goes without saying that dialogic instructional strategies are the core for
designing learner-social network interaction. Dialogic instructional strategies
promote “dialogic” or “conversational” instruction. In other words, instruction
that uses “talk” or discourse (dialogue) to support and effectuate learning.
Dialogic instruction is centered on dialogue (communication and interaction)
between teachers and learners, learners and learners, and learners and the
professional community. Dialogue can be verbal, written, or audiovisual (e.g.,
using VoiceThread or similar) and can take the form of a discussion, debate,
argumentation, or questioning. Dialogue in online learning environments is
sometimes referred to as digital or electronic discourse. The goal of dialogic
instruction is to allow different stakeholders in the teaching and learning
process to express their opinions and understandings of the content they
are teaching or learning, explain and clarify ideas, exchange and develop
ideas, ask questions, provide feedback or commentary, demonstrate how


Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction 157

Table 8.1 Supportive Instructional Strategies Mapped to Learning Activities
and Technologies (borrowed from Dabbagh et al., 2019)


Instructional
Strategies

Designing for
Scaffolding

Designing for
modeling and
explaining

Designing for
coaching &
mentoring

Example Learning
Activities

• Demonstrations

• Explanations

• Performance
Support
Systems    (PSS)

• Individualized
Guidance

• Demonstrations

• Explanations

• External modeling of
thought processes

• Interaction with
instructor and ex-
perts

• Novice coaching

• Feedback processes

Categories of Learning
Technologies

• Content Creation Tools
(e.g., LMS tools, perform-
ance support tools and sys-
tems, infographics,
microlectures)

• Knowledge Representation
Tools (e.g., KWL charts)

• Content Creation Tools
(e.g., job aids, video, ani-
mations, slideshows, screen-
casts)

• Collaboration &
Communication Tools (e.g.,
videoconferencing, ani-
mated    agents, shared online
spaces, chats, Twitter, dis-
cussion forums)

• Knowledge Representation
Tools (e.g., PowerPoint tem-
plates)

knowledge learned can be applied in a variety of contexts, and provide
evidence-based arguments that advance and expand knowledge of the content
domain (Dabbagh et al., 2019).

Instructional strategies that support dialogic learning include articulation,
collaboration and social negotiation, and reflection. Articulation involves
providing opportunities for learners to make their tacit knowledge explicit by
overtly explaining it to others. This allows learners to refine their under-
standing through reasoning, argumentation, and problem-solving, share
multiple perspectives, and generalize their knowledge so that it is applicable
in different contexts (Collins, 2012). Collaboration and Social Negotiation
involve working together as a community towards a common goal such as
collectively solving problems, creating products, or completing learning
tasks. More specifically, collaboration is the act of fostering interaction,
conversation, and joining of resources by two or more learners to complete
any number of learning activities, and social negotiation encompasses the
interrelations and dialogue between two or more individuals to arrive at a


158 Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction

mutually beneficial outcome. Collaboration and social negotiation build
upon the importance of the social environment and interactions with others
to provide information and opinions, which may conflict with their own
understanding. It is within the resolution, or negotiation, of these conflicts in
which knowledge is constructed and learning occurs (Schunk, 2011).
Reflection or reflective thinking includes a process of analyzing and making
judgments about what has happened to give a situation new meaning.
Promoting reflection or reflective thinking involves asking learners to review
what they have learned, analyze their performance, and compare it to that of
experts and peers (Collins & Kapur, 2014). Reflection is an intentional
behavior with the goal of analyzing one’s actions, comparing it to others, and
ultimately forming expert knowledge on the topic or skill.

Table 8.2 demonstrates how supportive and dialogic instructional strate-
gies can be used to design a COP. The table shows the pedagogical alignment
across five instructional design components, including (a) the instructional
characteristics of a COP presented earlier in this chapter, (b) the instruc-
tional strategies that support the design of a COP (primarily supportive &
dialogic), (c) the learning outcomes of the COP, (d) the learning activities
the COP participants will engage in, and (e) the assessment (how the
effectiveness of the COP will be assessed). The COP represented in Table 8.2
was designed to address the learning problem facing new teachers fresh out of
college having had little experience in the classroom. These teachers, upon
getting their first teaching job, are usually thrown into a “sink or swim”
situation where they don’t know what to do. Most schools assign a mentor to
a new teacher however mentors’ abilities can range from great to poor, and
even with an assigned mentor, many new teachers have moved to a new city
or state and don’t know anyone, and consequently feel isolated from the
professional teaching community. This makes it hard to ask questions or to
collaborate with their peers. The problem is there is no easy, open way for
teachers to communicate past the peers closest to their classroom. A COP
will allow new and veteran teachers from different schools and school dis-
tricts across the state and beyond a place to discuss issues, trends, and other
topics that will help them in their profession.

Technologies that Support Learner-Social Network
Interaction

Since social networking is heavily based on social media technologies and
their learning affordances, we classify social media into the following five


Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction 159


160 Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction


Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction 161


162 Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction

categories to provide a better understanding of the types of social media
technologies that can be used to support learner-social network interaction:

1  Communication Tools (e.g., Web 2.0–enabled e-mail applications such
as Outlook and Gmail; Web conferencing tools such as Zoom, MS
Teams, and Google Meet)

2  Experience- and resource-sharing tools (e.g., blogs, microblogs, & wikis
such as WordPress, Twitter, PBWiki; media-sharing tools such as Flickr
and YouTube; social bookmarking tools such as Zotero; file-sharing
tools, such as Google Docs and Dropbox)

3  Social networking tools (e.g., LinkedIn, FaceBook, Twitter, WhatsApp)

4  Gaming (e.g., social gaming, casual games, MMORPG)

5  Web or online office tools (e.g., Google Apps, Microsoft Teams)

Another way of classifying social media technologies is by functionality.
Figure 8.2 provides six functions of social media. These include:

•  Publishing

•  Sharing

•  Messaging

•  Discussing

•  Collaborating

•  Networking

Figure 8.2 Social Media Landscape 2020.


Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction 163

Bower and Torrington (2020) also developed a typology of free Web 2.0
technologies providing educators and designers with a list of 226 social media
technologies arranged into 40 types and 15 clusters that can be used via a
browser or mobile app to promote more productive and interactive learning.
Figure 8.3 illustrates the 15 clusters as text-based tools, image-based tools,
video tools, website creation tools, knowledge organization and sharing tools,
data analysis tools, 3D modeling tools, coding tools, social networking systems,
learning management systems, assessment tools, audio tools, multimodal
production tools, digital storytelling tools, and web conferencing tools.

As you can see from the various classifications of social media highlighted
in this section, and the examples provided in the visuals, all the technology
categories presented in chapter 4 of this book are applicable to designing
learner-to-social network interaction. Figure 8.4 shows the six initial tech-
nology categories used throughout this book to guide the digital design of the
dimensions of the Personalized Learning Interaction Framework.

The MOOC as a Use Case of Learner-Social
Network Interaction

Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) are a popular trend in the online
learning landscape with roots in the ever-expanding repertoire of Open
Educational Resources (OER) and online learning technologies (Dabbagh
et al., 2016). The term MOOC was coined in 2008 by Dave Cormier to
describe the Connectivism and Connective Knowledge (CCK08) course and
highlight the key characteristics of this new pedagogical model. For reference
purposes, the term MOOC stands for the following:

•  Massive - there is no limit on attendance;

•  Open - free of charge and accessible to anyone with internet connection;

•  Online - delivered via the internet; and

•  Courses - structured around a set of goals in a specific area of study

There are two types of MOOCs stemming from two different pedagogical
approaches: cMOOCs and xMOOCs. cMOOCs are based on connectivism,
which emphasizes interaction with a distributed network of peers, learning
artifacts, and learning technologies. Participants are encouraged to utilize
different social media and technology platforms to pursue their personal
goals, self-organize their participation, and generate and share knowledge
with their networks. Social networks and collaborative learning are essential


164 Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction


Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction 165

Figure 8.4 Six Classes of Learning Technologies.

elements of a cMOOC. xMOOCs on the other hand are based on a
cognitive-behaviorist approach hence xMOOCs are more structured and
centralized, and emphasize individual learning through video lectures and
regular assessments. xMOOCs are usually offered by prestigious universities
using platforms such as Coursera, Edx, and Udacity. cMOOCs are more
aligned with learner-social network interaction hence the use case provided
here is a cMOOC.

A prime example of a cMOOC in higher education is the Connectivism and
Connective Knowledge course, which was offered through the Learning
Technologies Center and Extended Education at the University of Manitoba
and facilitated by George Siemens and Stephen Downes. The goal of this
MOOC was to explain and enable the understanding of the principles of
connectivism as a learning theory of the digital age. The MOOC was offered
for credit to 25 paying students from the university and was also open for
registration at no cost to those interested in participating without credit, which
brought the total number of participants to over 2000 across 81 nationalities.
This MOOC spanned 12 weeks, each of which included an introductory
video, a synchronous session, and suggested readings and activities through the


166 Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction

course wiki. Collaboration and discussion were encouraged through different
online venues such as discussion forums, Twitter, and blogs. Because the
course emphasized learner autonomy, participants were encouraged to set their
own personal goals, participate in the course using other social media tools, and
decide on their level of participation in the different activities. Interestingly, the
open nature of the course and its emphasis on autonomy and diverse networks
enabled participants to develop their own sessions and learning venues such as
Second Life meeting areas, Google and Facebook groups, and a course page on
Twine (Downes, 2008; McAuley et al., 2010). In other words, the MOOC
enabled the creation of Personal Learning Networks (PLNs) within the larger
social network.

References

Anderson, P. (2007). What is Web 2.0? Ideas, technologies, and implications for edu-
cation. JISC Technology and Standards Watch, February 2007. Retrieved July 14
2008 from http://www.jisc.ac.uk/media/documents/techwatch/tsw0701b.pdf

Attwell, G. (2007). The personal learning environments: The future of eLearning?

eLearning Papers, 2(1), 1–8.

Bower, M., & Torrington, J. (2020). Typology of free web-based learning technologies,
Available from https://library.educause.edu/resources/2020/4/typology-of-free-web-
based-learning-technologies

Butterfield, S. (2003, March 24). An article complaining about ‘social software’ …
Sylloge. Retrieved February 10, 2006, from http://www.sylloge.com/personal/2003_
03_01_s.html#91273866

Cambridge, D., & Suter, V. (2005, January 1). Community of Practice Design Guide:
A Step-by-Step Guide for Designing & Cultivating Communities of Practice in
Higher Education. Retrieved March 31, 2022, from https://library.educause.edu/
resources/2005/1/zcommunity-of-practice-design-guide-a-stepbystep-guide-for-
designing-cultivating-communities-of-practice-in-higher-education

Chattopadhyay, S. (2016). Why Build Personal Learning Networks. eLearning Industry.

Available from https://elearningindustry.com/build-personal-learning-networks
Collins, A. (2012). What is the most effective way to teach problem solving? A com-

mentary on productive failure as a method of teaching. Instructional Science, 40(4),
731–735.

Collins, A. & Kapur, M. (2014). Cognitive Apprenticeship. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The
Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 109–127). Cambridge: University
Press.

Couros, A., & Hildebrandt, K. (2016). Designing for open and social learning. In

G. Veletsianos (Ed.), Emergence and innovation in digital learning (pp. 143–162). AU
Press.

Dabbagh, N., & Bannan-Ritland, B. (2005). Online learning: Concepts, strategies, and
application. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, Pearson Education.


Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction 167

Dabbagh, N., Benson, A., Denham, A., Joseph, R., Al-Freih, M., Zgheib, G., Fake, H., &
Guo, Z. (2016). Learning technologies and globalization: Pedagogical frameworks and
applications. SpringerBriefs in Educational Communications and Technology. Springer.
Dabbagh, Nada, & Castaneda, Linda. (2020). The PLE as a framework for developing
agency in lifelong learning. Educational Technology Research and Development, 68,

3041–3055. 10.1007/s11423-020-09831-z

Dabbagh, N., Howland, J., & Marra, R. (2019). Meaningful online learning: Integrating
strategies, activities, and learning technologies for effective designs. New York, N.Y.:
Routledge.

Dabbagh, N., & Reo, R. (2011). Back to the future: Tracing the roots and learning
affordances of social software. In M. J. W. Lee, and C. McLoughlin (Eds.), Web 2.0-
based e-Learning: Applying social informatics for tertiary teaching (pp. 1–20). IGI
Global.

Davis, M. (2008). Semantic wave 2008 report: Industry roadmap to Web 3.0 & multibillion
dollar market opportunities (executive summary). Washington DC: Project 10X.
Retrieved June 16, 2008 from http://www.project10x.com/

Downes, S. (2008). Places to go: Connectivism & connective knowledge. Innovate:
Journal of Online Education, 5. Retrieved from http://bsili.3csn.org/files/2010/06/
Places_to_Go- Connectivism Connective_Knowledge.pdf

Freifeld, L. (2013). Dive Into 2013 Training. Training, 50(1), 8.

Jackson, N. (2015). Seek, Sense, Share: Understanding the Flow of Information Through
a Personal Learning Network. Available from https://www.lifewideeducation.uk/blog/
seek-sense-share-understanding-the-flow-of-information-through-a-personal-learning-
network

Jarche, H., (2014) The Seek > Sense > Share Framework Inside Learning Technologies
January 2014, Posted Monday, 10 February 22 014 http://jarche.com/2014/02/the-
seek-sense-share-framework/

Jones, B. (2008). Interviews with 20 Web 2.0 influencers: Web 2.0 heroes. Wiley.
Kitsantas, A., & Dabbagh, N. (2010). Learning to learn with Integrative Learning

Technologies (ILT): A practical guide for academic success. Information Age Publishing.
Available from http://infoagepub.com/products/Learning-to-Learn-with-Integrative-
Learning-Technologies

Leftheriotis, I., & Giannakos, M. N. (2014). Using social media for work: Losing your
time or improving your work?. Computers in Human Behavior, 31, 134–142. DOI:
10.1016/j.chb.2013.10.016

McAuley, A., Stewart, B., Siemens, G., & Cormier, D. (2010). The MOOC model for
digital practice. Retrieved from: www.elearnspace.org/Articles/MOOC_Final.pdf
Mihiotis, A., & Argirou, N. (2016). Coaching: From challenge to opportunity. The

Journal of Management Development, 35(4), 448–463.

Puijenbroek, T. V., Poell, R. F., Kroon, B., & Timmerman, V. (2014). The effect of
social media use on work‐related learning. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning,
30(2), 159–172. DOI: 10.1111/jcal.12037

Ravenscroft, A., Schmidt, A., Cook, J., & Bradley, C. (2012). Designing social media for
informal learning and knowledge maturing in the digital workplace. Journal of
Computer Assisted Learning, 28, 235–249. 10.1111/j.1365-2729.2012.00485.x

Sessums, C. (2006, January 21). Notes on the significance of the emergence of blogs and
wikis. Available from http://eduspaces.net/csessums/weblog/6172.html


168 Designing for Learner–Social Network Interaction

Schunk, D. H. (2011). Learning theories: An educational perspective (6th edition). Boston,
MA: Pearson Education, Inc.

Sol, J., Beers, P. J., & Wals, A. E. J. (2013). Social learning in regional innovation
networks: Trust, commitment and reframing as emergent properties of interaction.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 49, 35–43. DOI: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.07.041

Stodd, J., & Reitz, E. (2019). Social learning. In J. J. Walcutt and S. Schatz (Eds.),
Modernizing learning: Building the future learning ecosystem (pp. 269–284).
Washington DC: Government Publishing Office. License: Creative Commons
Attribution CC BY 4.0 IGO

van Harmelen, M. (2008). Design trajectories: Four experiments in PLE implementation.
Interactive Learning Environments, 16(1), 35–46. DOI: 10.1080/10494820701772686
Wenger, E. C., & Snyder, W. M. (2000). Communities of practice: The organizational

frontier. Harvard Business Review, 78(1), 139–146.

Wenger-Trayner, E., & Wenger-Trayner, B. (2014, April 15). Communities of practice:
A brief introduction. https://wenger-trayner.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/06-
Brief-introduction-to-communities-of-practice.pdf


Evaluating Personalized  9

Learning Designs

Evaluating Strategies for PL

The importance of measuring learning and business outcomes goes without
saying. Enhancing a competitive edge, positive impacts to return on
investment and equity, increased employee motivation, commitment, and
satisfaction are but a few of the many benefits associated with Training and
Development programs (Jasson & Govender, 2017; Pelster et al., 2016;
Sahinidis & Bouris, 2008; Thompson et al., 2018). Many business executives
expect a return on their training investment; however, evidence suggests that
learners retain less than 10% of what’s learned in formal training courses
where the focus is solely on the transmission of content and what is re-
membered (Jasson & Govender, 2017). This data point may be one of the
myriads of reasons to explore other training and development strategies like
the PLiF (Thompson et al., 2018).

It’s also important to acknowledge that PL metrics, assessment, and
evaluation may be dependent on the programs put into place. An
assessment of the effectiveness of individualized program implementations
toward achieving learning outcomes is different from the assessment of
the  effectiveness  of  programmatic  level  evaluation.  As  Dabbagh,
Howland, and Marra (2018) specify, assessment focuses on the mea-
surement of whether or not instructional objectives are met whereas
evaluation is the process of determining the worth or value of an
instructional program. In this chapter, we will explore both the mea-
surement of learning outcomes via assessment as well as programmatic
value via evaluation.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003121008-9


170 Evaluating Personalized Learning Designs

And as we mentioned earlier in the book, the PLiF framework is
intended to be a holistic strategy. In this, it is imperative to reemphasize
that personalization evolves from the incorporation of each interaction
collectively within the framework and not the individual interactions.
Therefore, defining the scope of the overall assessment of learning and
programmatic  evaluation  is  necessary  for  understanding  the  impact
training programs have on an organization overall. In this chapter, we will
begin by exploring data points that may be leveraged to personalize
learning. Next, we will outline the variety of techniques that might be used
to assess the learning happening in the PLiF on an interaction level with
acknowledgment that each interaction (e.g., learner-content, learner-
learner, learner-small group, learner-mentor, coach, and AI, learner-
community of practice), may benefit from its own assessment of metrics
and analysis. Finally, we will explore how we can evaluate the effectiveness
of the PLiF by adapting Kirkpatrick’s Levels of Evaluation to account for a
PLiF implementation.

Data Sources to Personalize Learning

As mentioned early, data sources to personalize the learning experience
vary depending on the evaluation method defined. These include Learner
Defined Data (e.g., learner preferences, personalized learning plans,
learner goals, desired learning activities, learner profiles, and espoused
interests); Behaviorally Defined Data (e.g., implicitly defined interests,
information consumption behaviors, navigation preferences, behavioral
logs, motivational level); Contextually Defined Data (e.g., location, time,
organizational role, type of task, language, instructor input); Relationship
Driven Data (e.g., content relationships and community relationships);
and Performance Data (e.g., learner performance, existing expertise or
prior mastery, completions, academic outcomes, self-report metrics, and
level of proficiency).

While certain data sources can personalize an experience, learner per-
ceptions of how useful those personalized learning approaches vary among
stakeholders. According to a survey on personalized learning in a Massive
Open Online Course, there were considerable differences in perspectives
between employees, managers, and teachers or trainers on how learning
should be personalized (Betts & Sephton, 2018). For example, while 44%
of employees found personalizing content based on role or job function


Evaluating Personalized Learning Designs 171

desirable, 78% of managers and 61% of trainers and teachers saw the
benefit of personalizing in that manner. Similar discrepancies were
observed based on personalizing based on previous learner activity with
only 55% of employees stating the practice would be useful for their
purposes compared to 86% for managers and 78% for teachers or
trainers.

Our research suggests both managers and trainers saw personalizing
based on certain identifying factors (e.g., role or job function and previous
learning activity) as more desirable compared to employees in general
(Fake, 2018). While personalizing based on the employee’s identifying
factors may drive efficiency, this research indicates that a sizable population
of employees may feel that these types of approaches to personalizing
learning are not as helpful potentially as others. Behavioral metrics may be
informative (e.g., is there any increase in training usage with programs
account for an employee’s job role or previous learning activity?). This,
however, may flavor employee perceptions of the Workforce Training and
Development Programs and impact the interaction between the employee
and   the program. The tensions between organizational needs and indi-
vidual desires are apparent here. It’s also important to acknowledge that
the motivations for training may differ between the individual learner and
the organization. Whereas an organization may seek a particular outcome
from training and development programs, an individual may be motivated
by another factor altogether, including changing jobs, evolving their per-
sonal skillset, or addressing an ongoing, however, less acknowledged
organizational need. Perhaps a solution to this tension is to make the needs
of    an organization explicit so that learners can elect which problems they
are most compelled to solve, propose other solutions, and identify training
and development programs to solve the problems brought forth by the
organization.

Additional research is needed to understand which aspects of personalized
learning offerings are most useful to stakeholders. Questions emerge re-
garding the differences between employee, managers, and leadership per-
ceptions of how helpful different personalized learning data sources are in
creating an effective learning experience.

The larger question here is who should set the data analytics that per-
sonalizes the learning experience. Do learners define the metrics associated
with their training and development? Should it be training and development
professionals? A third-party? We explore this further below in a discussion
about the types of assessments proposed by experts.


172 Evaluating Personalized Learning Designs

Measuring Effectiveness of Learning Through
Assessment

The types of assessment mentioned in expert responses included “ongoing
self-assessments”, “strength and weaknesses analyses”, and “360 reviews”. In
addition to the aforementioned assessments, experts discussed using more
“objective diagnostics” while also embedding evaluations of the individual’s
“proficiency level”. Those who advocated for self-assessments seemed to
support the individual identification of growth goals with support through
community, network, or mentor-based interactions. Those who proposed
objective assessments or proficiencies were more likely to define the learning
goals upfront and then provide flexible learning pathways or resources for
learners to achieve those goals.

These approaches to personalized learning emphasize different aspects of
ownership over the learning process. On the one hand, for experts who
advocated for self-assessment, it was important that learners develop and
identify their personal learning goals. On the other hand, a contingent of
experts felt that competencies should shape the define the learning goals and
that learners should instead pursue the flexible learning paths available to
them in order to achieve those goals. The effectiveness of each approach may
be an interesting area for future research and experimentation.

Measuring the Learning in PLiF: Types of
Assessments

When it comes to how one might measure the impact of personalized
learning programs and the impact of the PLiF, experts focused on consistent
or variable assessment according to the learners’ needs, the use of individual
reflective assessment (self-reflection and self-evaluation which can be both
formative and summative), collective reflective assessment (e.g., 360 eva-
luations, performance reviews, peer or managerial scores, and/or feedback
from others which can be both formative and summative), internal objec-
tive assessment (e.g., knowledge check, objective formative feedback), and
external objective assessment (e.g., competency-based tests, exams, etc.) to
assess the achievement of their learning goals. In the following paragraphs,
we will explore the types of assessment to use and circumstances where one
might wish to leverage reflective or objective assessments, which data sources
to use, as well as how these assessments may be structured, sequenced, and
built upon.


Evaluating Personalized Learning Designs 173

Individual Reflective Assessments

According to experts, self-assessment was mentioned as a means of en-
couraging personalized learning practices in Workforce Training and
Development Programs (Fake, 2018). Andrade (2018) points out that most
definitions of self-assessments tend to be broad, however, the practice should
offer feedback to “inform adjustments to processes and products that deepen
learning and enhance performance”. The act of reflection, therefore, must
evolve as the learner evolves.

In designing self-assessments and evaluations, Andrade (2018) emphasizes
that formative models tend to offer students more ability to honestly assess
their performance. For example, in circumstances where performance out-
comes were judged by a self-assessment, learners often overestimated their
abilities. For example, Tejeiro et al. (2012), found higher education students
tended to rate their performance at a higher level compared to faculty ratings
when the self-reflection counted towards their final grade.

The study additionally suggests that self-assessment is most impactful
when areas of focus are defined and that student perceptions are more
positive when they are involved in developing the criteria for self-
assessment. Andrade (2018) indicates that this is also true when learners
are offered a flexible rubric or checklist to guide their assessment when
revising work. This finding suggests that learner ownership and buy-in to
the rubric, checklist, or make-up of the self-assessment may increase pos-
itive perceptions regarding the practice. Therefore, while templates may be
useful, offering flexible self-assessments may increase the adoption and use
of this technique.

The Association for Talent and Development (ATD, 2022) currently le-
verages a self-assessment as a mechanism to prioritize where one might wish
to focus across three domains of practice to include developing professional
capability, impacting organizational capability, and building personal capa-
bility. These three defined domains represent 23 knowledge and skill areas
wherein the ATD recommends practitioners focus time and attention in
order to respond to the demands of the modern talent and development
profession (2022). After reviewing 189 statements regarding one’s perception
of skills and abilities on a scale from “exploring” to “expert”, the ATD
assessment unlocks a report and a proposed learning plan to identify areas of
strength, weakness, potential gaps, and offer existing resources to support
continuous training and development opportunities for industry profes-
sionals.


174 Evaluating Personalized Learning Designs

Collective Reflective Assessments

Collective reflective assessments are a common means of conducting per-
formance reviews in the industry. As the Society of Human Resource
Management (SHRM) defines, performance appraisals are “periodic eva-
luations of an employee’s job performance against a set of expectations or
goals” (SHRM, 2022). Collective reflective assessments may also be leveraged
in MOOCs or leveraging peer review techniques within higher education
(Chan & King, 2017).

Of the collective reflective assessments, one approach popular in industry
is the 360 review (Zenger & Folkman, 2020). According to their Harvard
Business Review article, 360 reviews succeed when a variety of factors are
considered. To begin, the leader should have a role in defining who should
conduct the assessment and encourage those they select to be candid in their
feedback. Next, anonymity may foster greater candid feedback across parti-
cipants. When the report is presented to the individual, other supporting
factors involve the interpretation from a trusted individual with a consid-
eration of the context in which the feedback was provided. Ultimately, the
feedback should be presented in a manner that offers guidance and the next
steps in the form of a customized development plan. Finally, Zenger and
Folkman (2020) recommend the learner continue ongoing touchpoints with
training or coaching professionals to provide a sense of accountability.

In these best practices, we continue to see the importance of the learner’s
ownership over their evaluation process as a key theme in the effectiveness of
assessment implementation and impact.

Combining Individual and Collective Reflective
Assessments

A combination of self-assessment and input from peers could foster the
development of a personalized learning plan for each person to enable their
personal growth and development. For example, Managers who want to move
into leadership roles could be encouraged to leverage a self-assessment to reflect
on the abilities they already have in these areas. In the self-assessment process,
the manager would be encouraged to consult with peers, reporting employees,
supervisors, or leadership to get feedback either in-person, via email or chat,
which they can then use to shape their own, unique learning goals that address
their individual deficits and identify room for improvement elicited from their
reflections and the feedback they received. In the example mentioned above,


Evaluating Personalized Learning Designs 175

self-assessment and peer feedback are used to document areas for growth and
improvement as well as set future learning goals.

Internal Objective Assessments

Whereas individual reflective and collective assessments may be more subjective
and dependent on the perception of the individual within their own personal
and communal spheres, Internal Objective Assessments are leveraged to mea-
sure progress compared to a standard or competency as defined by a third party.
This type of assessment can be useful when demonstrating competencies across
organizations and beyond an organizational or institutional realm. As Carnegie
Mellon’s Eberly Center defines, formative assessment is intended to “monitor
student learning to provide ongoing feedback that can be used by instructors to
improve their training and by students to improve their learning” (2022).
These types of assessment can be leveraged to help students identify areas of
strength and weakness in a skill or knowledge-based domain wherein success
metrics within the field have been defined. For example, credentialing exams
such as the AWS Cloud Practitioner Exam seek to monitor proficiency based
on knowledge, skills, and abilities as defined by Amazon. This is also true for
standardized testing for other domains. Practice tests, knowledge checks, and
practice sessions all serve as examples of internal objective assessments.

Formative assessments may also be used in active learning classrooms to
provide student feedback prior to submitting a deliverable. For instance,
Adkins (2018) leveraged formative assessments in a User-Centered Design
course to encourage active learning and adjust the course to do a better job of
meeting student needs. In this, Adkins leveraged formative assessment not only
to assess the learning in the classroom, but also to optimize the environment
for future students by conducting a formative assessment on the actual course.
As mentioned earlier, the other approach advocated by experts involves
conducting internal objective assessments that evaluate individual proficiencies
towards defined competencies. For example, the assessment used in a leader-
ship training scenario could offer an objective assessment of the learner’s skill
sets that would then help the learner formulate a training plan. The learner
could complete a series of daily assessments delivered through a responsive
design adaptive platform (i.e., no longer than 10 minutes) in which managers
are required to answer questions. The assessments are directly aligned with key
competencies derived from each training goal. Mentors and mentees receive an
automated report each week with system-recommended actions for improve-
ment based on the desired leadership model. Then, mentors meet with


176 Evaluating Personalized Learning Designs

assigned participants once a week to debrief on the results. Here, competencies
seem to be defined for the learner, but flexible learning pathways and support
structures have been built to accommodate the learner’s experience.

External Objective Assessments

External Objective Assessments, or summative assessments define and eval-
uate student learning at the end of instruction and compare it against a
standard or benchmark. Examples include high-stakes final exams,
competency-based assessments, and final program evaluations. These point-
in-time assessments tend to emphasize the timeliness of the learning and
whether or not set standards or benchmarks are achieved by the learners.

The added pressure of benchmarks and standards may see more impact in
high-demand fields such as medicine. As Raupach et al. (2013) discovered,
summative assessment significantly increased the odds of correctly identi-
fying 3 out of 5 electrocardiogram examinations compared to formative
assessments. In this model, the high stakes associated with the summative
exam corresponded to the high stakes of accurately identifying a diagnosis.
Therefore, a takeaway for practitioners may be to marry the severity of the
domain to the seriousness of the assessment. Whereas some domains may
have wiggle room, the inaccurate diagnosis of an ailment may lead to death.
Therefore, a summative assessment may be more aligned with the outcomes
necessary to measure the success of the learner.

Combining Multiple Forms of Assessment

One might argue that a hybrid approach may be best suited toward leveraging
the collective strengths and weaknesses of personalized learning assessments.
For example, a personalized learning and development program could begin
with an internal reflective assessment (e.g., self-assessment) and follow up with
an objective diagnostic to see what learning objectives and content are most
needed and align the content delivery toward those individual needs. These
reflective and objective assessments could then be revisited on an ongoing basis
to support continued growth and development and to identify what needs
more work and what can be considered accomplished.

The table below specifies the different forms of assessment, their defini-
tion, the perspective they espouse, and potential use cases wherein the
assessment may be applicable (Table 9.1).


Evaluating Personalized Learning Designs 177


178 Evaluating Personalized Learning Designs

It is important to acknowledge the specific stressors associated with
demonstrating and assessing the value of programs in a Workforce Training
and Development environment wherein the focus may be centered on the
return of the training’s investment rather than the specific achievement of
specified learning outcomes. The hope is that measuring the effectiveness of
these types of learning interventions will bolster an argument to the lead-
ership of other positive training outcomes beyond the bottom line.

Tools to Assess Personalized Learning
Environments

Technologies that are used to assess personalized environments can include
rubric generation, rubric banks, analytic tools, test and quizzing tools, digital
portfolio systems, learner response systems, and immersive learning
environment-generated products/results to name a few (Dabbagh, Howland,
and    Marra, 2018). In addition, many HR platforms offer performance reviews
for employees. The alignment of these tools to the respective forms of assess-
ment is explored below (Table 9.2).

Evaluating the Return on Investment of Your PL
Program Overall

Despite potential ongoing critique and adaptation, Kirkpatrick’s (1993) four
levels of evaluation remains a commonly referenced model for determining
the ROI of Training Programs in Workforce Training and Development
Programs (Dabbagh & Bannan-Ritland, 2005; Downes, 2016; Jasson &
Govender, 2017). The model defines Level 1 as measuring the reaction of
how learners perceive the training; Level 2 is associated with the successful
measurement of the learning based on changes to attitudes, knowledge, or
skill; Level 3 is associated with behavioral outcomes; and Level 4 presents
business results or changes that have occurred on an organizational level due
to the training. Experiencing many iterations over time, Phillips (2013)
proposed Return on Investment as the 5th dimension, Kaufman and Keller
(1994) split Level 1 into two sections to include input (or learning materials)
and process (or delivery), and Jasson and Govender (2017) sought to account
for risk in further enhancing the impact of the model.

Given the popularity and general acceptance of this model in the industry,
evaluation leveraging Kirkpatrick’s is proposed to evaluate the effectiveness of


Evaluating Personalized Learning Designs 179


180 Evaluating Personalized Learning Designs


Evaluating Personalized Learning Designs 181

personalized learning. Assuming the application of the PLiF model, we
demonstrate proposed questions, example methods, and measures for PLiF
in the list below.

•  Level 1 - Reaction: How do learners perceive the PLiF?

•  Questions: What are learner perceptions of training relevancy?
Employee satisfaction? Perceived organizational loyalty? Perceptions
of learning opportunities?

•  Example Methods/Measures:

•  Workforce Training and Development Survey

•  Employee Satisfaction Survey

•  Interviews

•  Level 2 - Learning: What are the learning outcomes associated with
the application of the PLiF?

•  Questions: What is the performance of learners based on the
assessments? How does this performance change over 3 months?
6 months? 12 months? What learning outcomes are observable?

•  Example Methods/Measures:

•  Pre/post performance analysis of a randomly assigned test and
control group

•  Interviews

•  Overarching assessment based on collective results from the
collection of reflective and objective assessments mentioned
earlier in this chapter to measure the acquisition of knowledge,
skills, and abilities

•  Completions of certifications

•  Level 3 - Behavior Change: What are the observable behavior
changes associated with the PLiF?

•  Questions: How are learners approaching new learning tasks? What
self-directed learning behaviors do they exhibit? What training
interactions do they actively leverage? What new organizational
relationships and networks have stemmed from program implemen-
tation?

•  Example Methods/Measures:

•  Pre/post performance analysis of randomly assigned test and
control groups compared to measurement of newly adopted
behavior

•  Adoption, engagement, and sustained use of available interac-
tion types

•  Data analytics associated with supported learning technologies


182 Evaluating Personalized Learning Designs

•  Level 4 - Business Results: How do the business outcomes of
individuals applying the PLiF framework differ from their cow-
orkers? How do the business outcomes compare before and after the
application of the program?

•  Questions: Does the PL training program support organizational
outcomes and goals?

•  Example Measures:

•  Organizational capabilities prior to and after the installment of
PLiF over time.

•  Reduction of customer complaints and time to task completion

•  Increases in responsiveness, customer satisfaction, net promoter
score, employee satisfaction, cross-team collaboration, em-
ployee engagement, and employee retention

•  Level 5: Return on Investment: What is the cost and benefit of the
PLiF program?

•  Questions: What are the hard (e.g., materials, development hours,
systems) and soft costs (employee hours) of the new programs? How
do business results compare prior to the PLiF program? After
3 months? 6 months? 12 months?

•  Example Measures:

•  Increase in net profit, productivity, inter-organizational collab-
oration, client or student retention rates, revenue growth rate,
average revenue per user

•  Projected value of the new organizational capability

•  Assessed competitive advantage

Your Blueprint to Assess Your Organization’s PLiF
Offerings

To support the development of the PLiF in your workforce or organizational
learning environment, it is first recommended to conduct a holistic audit of
your existing training programs. In this process, training and development
managers or instructional designers will identify what programs currently
support learner-to-content, learner-to-learner, learner-to-small group,
learner-to-coach, mentor, or AI, and learner to the community of practice
interactions. An example inventory can be found in Table 9.3 below.

In this exercise, the types of programs, what is being personalized (e.g.,
content, delivery, assessment, etc.); who is involved (individuals, groups,
stakeholders, etc.); where the program occurs (specific location, remotely,


Evaluating Personalized Learning Designs 183


184 Evaluating Personalized Learning Designs

asynchronously, etc.); when the learning happens, what types of engagements
(e.g., 1:1 or a mix of 1 to N and 1:1); and how the program success is
measured can all be charted on the inventory. Once the types of programs
have been identified, it becomes easier to see where there might be oppor-
tunities or gaps in the existing offerings.

References

Adkins, J. (2018). Active learning and formative assessment in a user-centered design
course. Information Systems Education Journal, 16(4), 34–40.

Andrade, H. L. (2018). A critical review of research on student self-assessment. Frontiers
in Education, 4. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/feduc.2019.00087/full

Betts, B., & Sephton, E. (2018). We need to talk about … Personalized learning. Results
from our global survey report. HT2Labs. Retrieved from https://www.ht2labs.com/
personalized-learning-survey-report/

Chan, H. P., & King, I. (2017). Leveraging social connections to improve peer assessment
in MOOCS. WWW ‘17 Companion: Proceedings of the 26th International Conference
on World Wide Web Companion, 341–349, 10.1145/3041021.3054165

Dabbagh, N., & Bannan-Ritland, B. (2005). Online learning: Concepts, strategies, and
application. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, Pearson Education.

Dabbagh, N., Howland, J., & Marra, R. (2019). Meaningful online learning: Integrating
strategies, activities, and learning technologies for effective designs. New York, N.Y.: Routledge.
Downes, S. (2016). New models of open and distributed learning. In M. Jemni, K.
Khribi, and M. Koutheair (Eds.), Open education: From OER to MOOCs (pp. 1–21).

Berlin, Germany: Springer.

Eberly Center (2022). What is the difference between formative and summative assessment?
Carnegie Mellon University  https://www.cmu.edu/teaching/assessment/basics/
formative-summative.html#:~:text=The%20goal%20of%20formative%20assessment,
target%20areas%20that%20need%20work

Fake, H. (2018). Personalized learning within online workforce environments. Fairfax,
Virginia, United States: Manuscript in preparation, College of Education and Human
Development, George Mason University.

Jasson, C. C., & Govender, C. M. (2017). Measuring return on investment and risk in
training – A business training evaluation model for managers and leaders. Independent
Research Journal in the Management Sciences, 17(1). 10.4102/ac.v17i1.401

Kaufman, R., & Keller, J. M. (1994). Levels of evaluation: Beyond Kirkpatrick. Human
Resource Development Quarterly, 5(4), 371–380. 10.1002/hrdq.3920050408

Kirkpatrick, D. L. (1993). How to train and develop supervisors. New York: AMACOM.
Pelster, B., Johnson, D., Stempel, J., & van der Vyver, B. (2016, February). Careers and
learning: Real time, all the time [Research Report]. Retrieved from Deloitte Insights:
https://www2.deloitte.com/insights/us/en/focus/human-capital-trends/2017/learning-

in-the-digital-age.html?id=us:2el:3dc:dup3818:awa:cons:hct17#endnote-4

Phillips, P. (2013). The bottom line on ROI. How to measure the ROI in learning and develop-
ment, performance improvement, and human resources. ROI Institute. https://roiinstitute.net/


Evaluating Personalized Learning Designs 185

Raupach, T., Brown, J., Anders, S., Hasenfuss, G., & Harendza, S. (2013). Summative
assessments are more powerful drivers of student learning than resource intensive
teaching formats. BMC Medicine, 11(61). 10.1186/1741-7015-11-61

Sahinidis, A. G., & Bouris, J. (2008). Employee perceived training effectiveness rela-
tionship to employee attitudes. Journal of European Industrial Training, 32(1), 63–76.
https://isedj.org/2018-16/n4/ISEDJv16n4p34.pdf

Society for Human Resource Management (2022). Managing employee performance.
SHRM. https://www.shrm.org/resourcesandtools/tools-and-samples/toolkits/pages/
managingemployeeperformance.aspx

Tejeiro, R. A., Gomez-Vallecillo, J. L., Romero, A. F., Pelegrina, M., Wallace, A., &
Emberley, E. (2012). Summative self-assessment in higher education: Implications of
its counting towards the final mark. Electronic Journal of Research in Educational
Psychology, 10(2), 789–812. http://investigacion-psicopedagogica.org/revista/articulos/
27/english/Art_27_707.pdf

The Association for Talent and Development (2022). Access the capability model. ATD.
https://www.td.org/capability-model/access

Thompson, L., Pate, D., Schnidman, A., Lu, L., Andreatta, B., & Dewett, T. (2018). 2017
workplace learning report: How modern L&D pros are tackling top challenges. Retrieved
from https://learning.linkedin.com/blog/learning-thought-leadership/introducing-the-
2017-workplace-learning-report–top-trends—cha

Zenger, J. & Folkman, J. (2020, December 23). What makes a 360-Degree review suc-
cessful? Harvard Business Review.


Empowering Learners  10

to Engage in

Personalized Learning
Experiences

Introduction

In this book, we presented the Personalized Learning Interaction Framework
(PLiF) as a learner-centered approach for supporting personalized learning in
workforce training and development programs as well as in higher education
contexts. The PLiF was a result of a Delphi study (Fake & Dabbagh, 2021)
whose goal was to seek expert knowledge on the educational concept of
personalized learning, its dimensions (e.g., who should conduct personalized
learning, what can be personalized, where it can be personalized, and how
personalization should occur), and its application (i.e., how these dimensions
should  be applied given different education and training case studies). The
research resulted in five types of interaction that support personalized
learning: (1) learner-content interaction, (2) learner-learner interaction,

(3) learner-mentor, coach, or Artificial Intelligent (AI) Assistant interaction,

(4) learner-small group interaction, and (5) learner-social network or com-
munity of practice interaction. We described each type of interaction of the
PLiF, and how it can be implemented using technology along with examples
and best practices in Chapters 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 (Figure 10.1).

In this chapter, we extend our discussion of the PLiF beyond its five
dimensions of interaction to focus on the learner who is at the center of this
framework and the situational context of PLiF within the larger learning
ecosystem of the organization. Specifically, we focus on how to empower

DOI: 10.4324/9781003121008-10


Empowering Learners to Engage 187

Figure 10.1 Personalized Learning Interaction Framework (PLiF).

learners to take charge of their own learning and engage in personalized
learning experiences that strategically inform and guide their learning goals and
help them pursue meaningful, adaptive, and flexible education pathways to
accommodate their work, and life goals, and become successful agents and
curators  of their own learning over their lifetimes. First, it is important to note
that the PLiF is based on “learner-based personalization” and not “systems-
based personalization” as discussed in Chapter 2 of this book. Learner-Based
Personalization refers to a learning experience wherein the learner (versus the
system) drives the choice of what, how, when, where, and why the learning is
personalized. A common approach that captures learner-based personalization


188 Empowering Learners to Engage

is the construct of Personal Learning Environments or PLEs, which is briefly
discussed in Chapter 2 and Chapter 8 of this book. We elaborate on the
concept of PLEs next and its role in supporting self-regulated learning.

Learner-Based Personalization and Self-Regulated
Learning

Learner-Based Personalization which is at the core of the PLiF can be
achieved through the development and evaluation of Personal Learning
Environments or PLEs. As defined in Chapter 8, a PLE is a self-driven digital
learning space that is unique to its maker, author, or initiator, and composed
of one or more technological artifacts, tools, or platforms (Dabbagh &
Castaneda, 2020). A PLE is largely facilitated by cloud-based Web 2.0
technologies and services designed to help learners create, organize and share
content, participate in collective knowledge generation, and manage their
own meaning-making. Figure 10.2 shows the plethora of Web 2.0 tech-
nologies that support the development of a PLE.

Figure 10.2 Web 2.0 Technologies that Support PLE.


Empowering Learners to Engage 189

A PLE can also be described as a learning environment designed around
each learner’s goals or learning approach. The PLE helps learners organize
the influx of information and resources that they are faced with on a daily
basis into a personalized digital learning space or experience (Dabbagh,
2015). The underlying principle of a PLE is that the student (learner) is put
in charge of pedagogically designing their own learning environment, hence
it is learner-based personalization at its finest. In a PLE, the student develops
an individualized digital identity through the perceptual cues and cognitive
affordances that the personalized learning environment provides such as what
information to share and when, who to share it with, and how to effectively
merge formal and informal learning experiences.

In the 21st century, PLEs have been steadily gaining ground as an
effective platform for student learning and have been described by
scholars such as Brigid Barron, Stephen Downes, Tom Haskins, Scott
Wilson, and Mark van Harmelen as individual educational platforms,
self-initiated and interest-driven learning environments, unique cre-
ations of individual learners that help shape their knowledge and
understandings, self-directed learning systems, and methods and tools
that help students organize and self-manage their learning.

(Dabbagh, 2015, p. 573)

The rise of the PLE is also, in part, a reaction to the use of the Learning
Management System (LMS) in higher education contexts. LMSs are pri-
marily controlled by the institution’s faculty and administrators, leaving little
room for students to create, manage, and maintain a personalized learning
space that supports their own learning activities as well as connections to
peers and social networks across time and place. Hence learner control and
learner-based personalization are often absent in the institutional LMS.
Contrastingly, in a PLE, the locus of control shifts away from the institution
to individual students, helping them take control of their own learning and
build a personal cyberinfrastructure and learning ecosystem that extends
learning beyond the boundaries of the classroom, institution, or organiza-
tion, using distributed and portable tools. In a PLE, the student chooses the
tools that match their learning preference and pace, and the student decides
how to organize and manage the content to learn effectively and efficiently.
Consequently, PLEs can be perceived as a single student’s educational or e-
learning platform, allowing collaboration with other students, experts,
instructors, mentors, coaches, etc., and coordination of such interactions across
a wide range of systems and learning communities. Given this description of


190 Empowering Learners to Engage

PLEs, the question becomes, are students (learners, individuals) ready to take
this on? Are learners ready to drive their own learning using the PLE approach?
Do learners possess the strategies and skills needed to develop and maintain an
effective and ever-evolving PLE for a lifetime of learning?

In fact, there is strong evidence that PLEs coupled with the affordances of
social media can foster Self Regulated Learning (SRL) which is critical for
developing and maintaining a PLE (Dabbagh & Kitsantas, 2012). SRL is
defined as the learner’s ability to independently and proactively engage in
self-motivating and behavioral processes that increase goal attainment
(Zimmerman, 2000). More specifically, SRL can be regarded as a set of skills
that enable learners to set learning or task goals, identify learning or task
strategies needed to achieve those goals, and reflect on the efficacy of the
strategies and processes that helped them achieve their goals (Dabbagh &
Kitsantas, 2012). SRL skills can be compared to Personal Knowledge
Management (PKM) skills, defined as “the act of managing one’s personal
knowledge through technologies” (Cigognini et al., 2011, p. 127), ranging
from creating, organizing, and sharing digital content and information, to
higher order or more complex PKM skills such as connectedness, critical
ability, creativity, and the ability to balance formal and informal learning
contexts. PKMs were discussed briefly in Chapter 8 as a set of processes
(seeking, sensing, sharing) that help learners develop effective Personal
Learning Networks (PLNs) (Jarche, 2014). The focus of this chapter is on
SRL skills and how they can be fostered through the development of PLEs.
The relationship between PLEs and SRL is intuitive and interdependent and
social media technologies have pedagogical affordances that can foster this
relationship. Specifically, PLEs can be perceived as a pedagogical approach that
facilitates SRL through the deliberate and strategic integration of formal and
informal learning using social media technologies (Dabbagh & Kitsantas,
2012). PLEs require the development and application of SRL skills because
PLEs are built bottom-up starting with personal goals, information manage-
ment, and individual knowledge construction, and progressing to socially

mediated knowledge and networked learning through PLNs and COPs.

Kitsantas and Dabbagh (2010) posit that social media have pedagogical
affordances that can help support and promote student self-regulated
learning by enabling the creation of PLEs, and that the relationship
between PLEs and SRL is synergistic requiring the simultaneous, progressive,
and transformative development and application of self-regulated learning
skills using social media. However, when students (learners) are put in charge
of developing a PLE, they need pedagogical guidance and support, partic-
ularly if they do not possess SRL skills. With insufficient guidance, students


Empowering Learners to Engage 191

may not be able to create a PLE that cultivates their independent learning
skills and helps them achieve their learning goals. This is where the role of
faculty (including instructors, trainers, coaches, mentors, AI assistants, etc.)
becomes crucial. Faculty need to scaffold students on how to manage and
navigate the content they create in a PLE and how to become effective
organizers, analyzers, evaluators, and synthesizers of information as they
gradually assume more responsibility for their own learning (Dabbagh,
2015). Dabbagh and Kitsantas (2012, 2013) developed a scaffolding
framework (Table 10.1) to assist faculty in scaffolding student PLE devel-
opment using social media technologies to support SRL. The framework is
based on the pedagogical affordances of social media, namely the three levels
of interactivity that social media enable: personal information management,
social interaction and collaboration, and information aggregation and
management (see Figure 10.3).

As illustrated in Table 10.1, level 1 of the scaffolding framework, personal
information management, is used to scaffold learners to create a private
learning space using social media technologies such as blogs and wikis and to
populate this space with self-generated content for personal productivity or
organizational learning tasks. This could include creating online bookmarks
and media resources surrounding course topics and personal journals and
calendars related to course assignments and learning tasks. These activities
engage students in acquiring and applying the SRL skills of goal setting and
time management. This level also aligns with the PLiF dimension of
Learner-Content Interaction.

Level 2 of the scaffolding framework, social interaction and collaboration,
is used to scaffold learners to engage in social interaction and collaboration by
sharing the content and task organization they created in level 1 with their
peers and course instructors, thereby extending the PLE from a personal
learning space to a social learning space or personal learning network (PLN).
For example, learners can enable the commenting and collaborative editing
features of blogs or wikis, inviting instructor and peer feedback and informal
knowledge sharing. Such activities promote the SRL processes of self-
monitoring and help-seeking, and prompt students to identify strategies
needed to perform more formal learning tasks. This level aligns with the PLiF
dimensions of Learner-Learner Interaction, Learner-Small Group
Interaction, and Learner-Coach/Mentor/AI Assistant Interaction.

Level 3 of the framework, information aggregation and management, is
used to scaffold learners to engage in content aggregation and synthesis using
various social media tools and features prompting student reflection and
evaluation of their overall learning experience and leading to further


192 Empowering Learners to Engage


Empowering Learners to Engage 193


194 Empowering Learners to Engage

Figure 10.3 Three Levels of Social Media Interactivity.

customization and personalization of the PLE around their learning needs.
These activities support the SRL skills of self-reflection and self-evaluation and
help students become better prepared for future educational and professional
pursuits. This level aligns with the PLiF dimension of Learner-Social
Network Interaction. Figure 10.4 provides a snapshot of Table 10.1 showing
the three levels of the scaffolding framework and the use of social media
technologies to support self-regulated learning skills in PLE development.

Figure 10.4 Scaffolding SRL in PLE Development.


Empowering Learners to Engage 195

Research on Social Media, SRL, and PLEs

Now that we have connected the PLiF to the scaffolding framework that
supports the development of a PLE using SRL, let’s examine the research on
social media, SRL, and PLEs to see if PLEs are indeed enablers of SRL
through the use of social media. Most of the research conducted on how
PLEs can support self-regulated learning using social media has been in
higher education contexts since this is where the construct of PLEs was
conceptualized and tested. As defined earlier in this chapter, PLEs can be
described as new-generation learning environments that embody the Web

2.0 characteristics of openness, personalization, collaboration, social net-
working, social presence, and user-generated content (Dabbagh & Kwende,
2021). PLEs enable personal and social learning experiences that empower
learners to direct their own learning and develop lifelong learning skills,
crossing institutional and organizational boundaries and evolving over time
and place, making competencies and capabilities visible and attainable in
education and workplace contexts. The research presented in this section
validates these PLE principles and characteristics.

In a series of studies (Dabbagh & Fake, 2017; Dabbagh & Kwende, 2021)
that examined college students’ perceptions of PLEs and what social media
tools students use to structure their PLEs, participants (who were part-time
students and full-time workers) were asked to document in a blog post what
tools they use for learning and what their ideal PLE might look like. Findings
revealed that students perceived PLEs as a digital learning platform that
allowed (a) collaboration with other students and instructors; (b) the use of
technology as tools for discovery learning and experimentation; and (c) the
curation and management of educational resources. Additionally, partici-
pants reported that their ideal PLE would include opportunities for dis-
cussion, collaboration, and interaction; tools for organizing, planning, and
resource management; experiential learning strategies; and the use of effective
technology to support a personalized learning experience. Overall, partici-
pants in these two studies perceived PLEs as making their learning experience
more personal, connected, social, and open (Tu et al., 2012). Another in-
teresting finding of these studies is that participants perceived PLEs as
physical spaces intersecting with or augmenting digital spaces. Participants
reported that physical spaces provide comfort, peace, and serenity that enable
personalized learning.

In a case study (Dabbagh et al., 2015) that examined how students create
PLEs using social media and the extent to which they engage in the SRL
process, findings revealed that PLE development engages students in the SRL


196 Empowering Learners to Engage

processes of goal setting, task strategies, self-monitoring and self-evaluation.
Participants also reported being intrinsically motivated in using social media
to create their PLE. It can be inferred here that when learning is driven by
the student’s internal needs, interests, motivations, and preferences, as is the
case in PLEs, personalization becomes intrinsic to the learner and learning
becomes a personal endeavor (Ito et al., 2013). Moreover, the goal of the
learner shifts from a recipient of information and participator in a learning
experience that is designed and facilitated by the instructor, to a collector,
organizer, and designer of one’s own learning experience.

In a qualitative study that examined personalized learning within work-
force education contexts (Fake & Dabbagh, 2021), leaders in training and
development were interviewed to uncover how they defined personalized
learning in the workplace and how it might be implemented as a training
approach in workforce online programs. The findings revealed a multitude of
perspectives regarding how learning should be personalized (e.g., in multi-
modal formats from a delivery, informational, and device perspective), who
should be conducting the personalized learning (individuals, managers or
supervisors, training departments, online communities of peers, or adaptive
technologies), and what parameters should be used in personalizing learning
(e.g.,  by learner preferences, personalities, role, level of proficiency, task).
These differences in perspectives suggest a lack of clarity regarding what
personalization is, and how it might be designed, implemented, or evaluated
as    an approach for training and development in the organization. In fact, it
was this lack of clarity that led to the Delphi study that resulted in the PLiF
which formed the basis of this book.

The results of the Fake and Dabbagh 2021 study also revealed that the
majority of participants described personalized learning as involving the
learner with input from a wide range of social relationships, social networks,
and collaborative technologies suggesting that an individualized as well as a
social element to personalized learning was important to workforce leaders.
Other research has come to similar conclusions demonstrating the power of
social media in supporting the creation of personalized learning experiences
(Dabbagh & Kitsantas, 2012). A key takeaway of this research is that
personalized learning requires connections to social networks and com-
munities of practice within and outside the organization. Thus enabling
ongoing engagement with peers or others on a variety of domains and
organizational topics, using the PLiF, may need to become a priority for
those implementing personalized learning in the workforce.

To understand how the findings of this research scales to a large audience,
Dabbagh, Fake, and Zhang (2019) examined student perspectives on the


Empowering Learners to Engage 197

value and effectiveness of technology use for personal learning in higher edu-
cation. Six hundred and twenty-two college students (N = 622) in a large
public university in the U.S. were surveyed regarding what technologies
(hardware and software) they use most frequently for learning, what tech-
nologies they value for learning, and how effective they perceive technology
in supporting their learning. The results revealed that technology use and
value were closely aligned, with laptops and smartphones reported as most
frequently used for learning and highly valued underscoring the importance
of mobile and portable devices in supporting anytime anywhere learning. In
terms of software used for learning, search engines, file-sharing tools, digital
libraries, YouTube videos, and wikis were ranked highest, suggesting that
social media use is enabling self-directed learning approaches that place
students at the center of their learning process reinforcing the concept of
Learner-Based Personalization, which is the principle underlying the PLiF.
Overall, the majority of participants in this study perceived technology as
effective in fostering discussion, collaboration and interaction; enabling ex-
periential learning; supporting organization, planning, and resource man-
agement; and facilitating a personalized learning experience. The results of
this study confirm the results of the studies in higher education contexts
mentioned earlier in this section and suggest that traditional learning man-
agement systems (LMS) may no longer serve as the best means for organizing
or facilitating learning in organizations and institutions given that learners
are embracing tools and resources that extend beyond the traditional LMS

and designing their own PLEs using social media technology.

Jane Hart, Founder of the Centre for Learning & Performance Technologies
(C4LPT) – one of the world’s leading websites on learning trends, technologies,
and tools – and author of the online resource Modern Workplace Learning
2023, conducts a yearly survey on the top 100 tools used for personal learning
(PPL), workplace learning (WPL), and education (EDU). The results of the
16th Annual Tools for Learning Survey revealed that the top 10 tools used for
personal learning (PPL) were YouTube, PowerPoint, Google Search, MS
Teams, Zoom, Google Docs/Drive, LinkedIn, Word, Canva, and Wikipedia.
These technologies fall into the categories of collaboration and communication
tools, content creation tools, and information search and resource management
tools (see Chapter 4 for the classification of learning technologies) further
solidifying the research on what tools learners use for learning and validating
the intensifying evidence that traditional LMSs are no longer sufficient for
supporting learning in the 21st century. Figure 10.5 shows the 2022 top 100
tools for learning across the personal, workforce, and education contexts. This
can also be accessed here https://www.toptools4learning.com/.


198 Empowering Learners to Engage

Figure 10.5 Top 100 Tools for Learning.

Personalized Learning as a PLE Ecosystem

Given the potential of a PLE to support learner-based personalization by
integrating the dimensions of the PLiF and capitalizing on the affordances of
social media technology and SRL as illustrated so far in this chapter, the next
step is to envision what this might look like in the larger context of a learning
ecosystem. An ecosystem “is comprised of interconnected parts, with the
behaviors of many individual agents affecting one another as well as the
environment’s overall holistic pattern” (Walcutt & Schatz, 2019, p. 227). So
a learning ecosystem can be defined as “a system of people, content, tech-
nology, culture, and strategy, existing both within and outside of an orga-
nization, all of which has an impact on both the formal and informal
learning that goes on in that organization” (Eudy, 2018).

The term learning ecosystem is not just a catchy word or phrase, rather it
helps us think about all the components that make up a learning system and
how these components interact with each other. It also helps consider a
holistic view of the learning environment to include people/learners, training
content, technology, learning culture, and business strategy, and examine the
complex relationships among these components. Just like when we think
about living ecosystems, whether they are self-sustaining or endangered;
healthy or sick; nurtured or threatened; thinking about learning ecosystems
in this way makes us aware of what is going on inside and outside the
organization from a learning and development perspective and how this will


Empowering Learners to Engage 199

impact organizational performance and the bottom line. Walcutt and Schatz
(2019) suggest that the future learning ecosystem is a substantive re-
imagination of learning and development due to the need to recognize that
learning can no longer be viewed as a single event, nor a series of events, but
rather learning must be viewed as a lifelong experience of continual growth.
Walcutt and Schatz also suggest that future learning ecosystems must provide
personalized pathways for learners to progress through, and that deep
learning that expedites the transfer of learning from practice to real-world
settings must be strongly emphasized.

The concept of a learning ecosystem transcends the traditional approach
to designing instruction which generally assumes a given target population (a
particular individual or cohort) as well as a specific setting and set of con-
ditions (e.g., specific objectives, subject matter). When we envision learning
across lifetimes this linear approach to designing instruction no longer suf-
fices. We need instructional design models that encompass diverse learning
experiences, various media, diverse populations, cultures, and contexts, many
of which fall outside the instructional designer’s purview. Consequently, we
need an updated instructional or learning design approach that (Walcutt,
Bannan, & Dabbagh, 2019, p. 226):

•  facilities learning as a gestalt derived from the collective sum of all
learning events and experiences;

•  recognizes learning outcomes are increasingly self-directed and stitched
across different contexts, networks, and communities; and

•  actively incorporates technology to enable learning - not only as an
instructional delivery mechanism but also as the “glue” to connect
learning events to one another.

In other words, we need a multidimensional model of instructional design
that integrates traditional micro-level interventions as well as macro- and
meta-level interventions; considers learners’ own agency in the learning
process, and actively connects experiences across the crisscrossing landscape
of the learning ecosystem.

Having established the concept of a learning ecosystem and the need for
updated instructional models to support the design, development, imple-
mentation, and evaluation of a learning ecosystem, let’s consider how we
might envision the PLE as a learning ecosystem. The PLE can be considered
a freely assembled ecosystem consisting of any set of communication and
collaboration channels, cloud resources, web apps, and social media tech-
nologies that enable learner agency in creating educational pathways to


200 Empowering Learners to Engage

achieve learning, work, and life goals. In fact, EDUCAUSE, the nonprofit
association whose mission is to advance higher education through the use of
information technology, defines PLEs as tools, communities, and services that
constitute the individual educational platforms learners use to direct their own
learning and pursue educational goals (2009). However in order to extend the
pedagogical and technological concept of the PLE to a future learning eco-
system based on the principles and characteristics of learning ecosystems
outlined in this section, we envision PLEs as the core of a learning ecosystem
where individuals are able to create personalized learning interactions that
strategically inform and guide their learning goals and education pathways;
enable the selection of different education providers to achieve those goals;
and attain recognition for lifelong learning skills with the help of digital and
stackable credentials. The overarching vision of this learner-driven PLE
ecosystem is a more diverse, personalized, social, adaptive, dynamic, inte-
grated, and transparent system configured of education providers, open
education resources (OER), learning communities, and social and profes-
sional networks in which learners can select and combine in their PLEs
different education providers (e.g., LinkedIn Learning) to achieve learning
goals targeted for specific job skills, and providers can “compete” for learners
who are paying for competency-based credit or discrete components of a
degree or certification rather than the degree itself (Dabbagh & Castaneda,
2020). Figure 10.6 provides a snapshot of what the PLE as a future learning
ecosystem might look like.

Figure 10.6 PLE ecosystem.


Empowering Learners to Engage 201

As you can see from the figure, PLEs are learner-driven and vary from
person to person. Learners choose their education pathways based on their
learning needs, goals, and interests. They can seek formal or informal
learning opportunities to advance their knowledge on a topic; choose to
participate in learning communities related to their field of study; become
members of employment networks searching for new employment oppor-
tunities; or, seek micro-credentials through badging. These are just a few of
the opportunities that are available for learners as they build their personal
learning environments.

The proposed future learning ecosystem aligns with the ten principles put
forth by the U.S. Department of Education’s Office of Educational
Technology in January 2017 for a “student-centered higher education eco-
system” that (a) guides students toward education that enables them to
achieve their goals, is suitable to their needs, and aligns with their interests;

(b) allows students to build meaningful education pathways incrementally;

(c) allows students to document their learning in ways that can be applied to
further education or meaningful work; and (d) enables the creation of a
network of learning that supports students as peers, creators and en-
trepreneurs, and agents of their own learning.

Implementing the PLE as a Future Learning
Ecosystem

In order to achieve the vision of a learner-centered ecosystem that is premised
on the concept of PLEs and PLiF, several pilots/phases need to take place.
First, we need to ensure that there is a transparent and equitable process for
learners to create PLEs across all learning contexts. Although there are
numerous known platforms and technologies that enable the design of PLEs
(e.g., Evernote, Known, and e-portfolios), a PLE can be created in any
technology or set of technologies or tools that support the following six
components: personal profiler, aggregator, editor, scaffolds, recommender,
and services (Kop & Fournier, 2014). Most Web 2.0 technologies (e.g.,
blogs, wikis, social bookmarking tools, tags, aggregation services) support
these six components. In fact, learning in the context of Web 2.0 technol-
ogies has become highly self-motivated, autonomous, and informal, as
described earlier in this chapter.

However creating PLEs is not just about the Web 2.0 technologies, it is
also about the process that guides the effective design of PLEs which involves
using the PLiF and its five interactions to progressively support self-regulated


202 Empowering Learners to Engage

learning strategies and skills such as goal setting, task strategies, help-seeking,
time management, self-monitoring, and self-evaluation. This process is
depicted in the three-level framework for scaffolding SRL through the use of
social media and PLiF interactions to develop evolving and sustainable PLEs
(see Table 10.1). We propose testing this framework using three phases as
follows:

Phase 1: Scaffolding PLE Development with Human
Coaches Using the 3-Level Framework

The three-level framework will be tested with college students at (at least)
six institutions worldwide to ensure that the sample population is diverse,
cross-cultural, and inclusive of students of various ethnicities and socio-
economic status. This first phase will involve human coaches who will
coach students/learners on how to develop PLEs using the three-level
framework. As indicated in Table 10.1, this involves supporting learners in
creating learner-content interaction, learner-learner interaction, learner
small group interaction, learner-mentor/coach interaction, and learner
social network interaction, per the PLiF.

Phase 2: Designing an AI Coach to scaffold PLE
Development Using the 3-Level Framework

The second phase will involve designing and testing an AI coach or personal
assistant that scaffolds the development of PLEs. The use of AI in education
is empowering intelligent tutoring systems which may evolve into “lifelong
learning companions” that can gather data and support learners as they grow
and develop their knowledge. The AI coach will be modeled on the human
coaching interactions that occur in the first phase and will target the six
essential technological components of a PLE mentioned earlier. The AI
coach will scaffold learners in creating a PLE by helping them identify
learning goals, link to social networks or learning communities around
shared goals, and determine learning pathways that lead to recognition and
credentialing of competencies acquired. This personalized learning experi-
ence   is based on the three-level framework depicted in Table 10.1 and aligns
with the PLiF interactions. Design-based research (DBR) will be used to
evaluate the effectiveness of the AI coach in supporting PLE development
and the degree to which students acquire SRL skills.


Empowering Learners to Engage 203

Phase 3: Embed an LRS into the Learning
Ecosystem Infrastructure to Capture Learning
Analytics and Optimize the PLE Ecosystem

The third pilot or phase will involve embedding an LRS (Learning Record
Store) in the learning ecosystem infrastructure (which could be the university’s
LMS if this is what is being used to test the ecosystem or similar platform) to
collect data on the learning ecosystem. An LRS enables modern tracking of
learning experiences, achievements, and job performance (if needed) across
multiple platforms and applications through the use of xAPI technology. The
LRS is the heart of any technology-enabled ecosystem and the data collected
from a range of learning activities (learning analytics) can be used to support
personalized learning experiences and evaluate the effectiveness of the learning
ecosystem in achieving its goals. In order to accomplish phases 2 and 3 of this
pilot, we will need a machine learning expert to assist with the development of
the AI coach and LRS/xAPI experts in order to ensure that learning data is
shared responsibly across platforms, applications, and stakeholders.

In terms of beneficiaries, the PLE ecosystem would benefit college students
and their future workplaces as well as college faculty, education providers, and
learning resource providers. Personalized learning would be supported and
promoted. A university setting is ideal for testing this future learning ecosystem
given the diversity of the student population across global institutions and the
resources available to faculty and students to achieve teaching and learning
goals. Risks include the degree to which students are willing to take control of
their learning, preparing faculty to transform their teaching practice to
accommodate the concept of a PLE, ensuring seamless transitions between the
components of the PLE ecosystem, and keeping the PLE ecosystem open and
secure. Additional challenges in the workplace include corporate leadership
buy-in, scaling PLEs across the organization, learner privacy considerations,
and creating cultural norms surrounding the use of social media technologies.

Extending the Dimensions of PLiF

As we envision future learning ecosystems that require new instructional
design models, we will also need to acquire new learning theories that em-
brace learner-based personalization interactions. One such theory that has
come to the forefront in the digital age is Sociomaterial Entanglement
Theory or SET. SET is proposed as a theory that embodies the socio-material
entanglement with which people learn and the technosocial reality we live in


204 Empowering Learners to Engage

as well as an approach that enacts contemporary ideas about how people
learn (Dabbagh & Castaneda, 2020). SET was conceptualized to battle the
prevailing tendency of traditional learning theories to limit conceptions of
the “social” to interactions between persons rather than between persons and
things (Malafouris & Renfrew, 2010). Specifically, traditional learning the-
ories that are grounded in constructivism, social constructivism, situated
cognition, cognitivism, or behaviorism, have remained oblivious to the
“medium” or “material” that shapes human interaction and agnostic of its
affordances and how they influence the manner in which people act, per-
ceive, or think. Enter connectivism.

Connectivism is a result of the intense use of technology in education
functioning more as a philosophy of education rather than a learning theory. In
his classical article, Siemens (2005) discussed the limitations of behaviorism,
cognitivism, and constructivism as theories of learning because they do not
address learning that occurs outside people (i.e., learning that is stored and
manipulated by technology) and within organizations (Mattar, 2018). At its
heart, connectivism is the thesis that knowledge is distributed across a network
of connections (to humans and things), and therefore learning consists of the
ability to construct and traverse those networks (Downes, 2007). The PLE can
be perceived in a similar vein. The relationships between the elements that
configure the PLE, human and non-human, and their role in facilitating
learning are symbiotic in that they impact each other in a reciprocal way
(Dabbagh & Castaneda, 2020). Hence, the PLE elements are entrenched in
what some scholars call a socio-material entanglement (Carvalho and Yeoman
2019; Decuypere & Simons 2016; Fenwick et al., 2011).

In other words, the intersection of the technical (material) and the social
(human) through thought and action, also known as multiagent socio-technical
systems, means that humans and “things” are ontologically inseparable and are
observable through intra-action and through the relationships with the other
elements of the learning ecosystem in the context of their contribution to the
learning activity (Frauenberger, 2020, p. 21). SET builds on the socio-material
entanglement phenomenon and multiagent socio-technological systems. SET is
not an explanatory theory, but rather an approach or framework with a broad
spectrum of applications that are able to integrate some of the most naturalistic
ideas about how people learn in the digital environment. SET embraces “con-
nected learning” or “networked learning” as depicted in connectivism and “con-
nectivist pedagogy” (Downes, 2022). Given this discussion, we propose adding a
sixth dimension to the Personalized Learning Interaction Framework (PLiF)
which forms the basis of learner-based personalization and the enabler of the PLE
learning ecosystem. We propose calling this sixth dimension: Learner-to-Internet


Empowering Learners to Engage 205

of Things (IoT) Interaction. The Internet of things (IoT) describes physical
objects (or groups of such objects) with sensors, processing ability, software,
and other technologies that connect and exchange data with other devices and
systems over the Internet or other communications networks (Brown, 2016;
Hendricks, 2015; ITU, 2022; and Shafiq et al., 2022). Some of the most
common IoTs that are used commercially include home automation, such as
Amazon’s Alexa or Google Home, and wearable technology, such as Apple
Watch.

Within the PLiF framework, the Learner-Internet of Things interaction
references data inputs within the multiple technological systems. The array of
data inputs from the multiple devices may be collected on a dashboard and
serve as a mechanism to cultivate a reaction or hypothesis by the learner
which then can be used to test new learning actions, behaviors, or ap-
proaches. The sensors, apparati, or tools used to collect these insights,
therefore, become a reflection and observation of the existing PLE learning
ecosystem. This allows the learner to consider the output and decipher their
next learning actions, enabling a data-driven approach toward future learning
and action. The possibilities extend to many collaborative and cross-
functional operational environments. For example, the government, higher
education, non-profits, and industrial partners have used sensors to chart and
optimize traffic patterns in downtown areas of Chicago (Array of Things,
2021). In another study, Bannan et al. (2020) leveraged IoT to chart and
optimize cross-team collaboration in simulated law enforcement emergency
scenarios. As Kurzweill and Baker (2016) argue, the increased connectivity of
devices fosters the possibility of more dynamic interventions, advanced
instructional techniques and may free the instructor or trainer to focus on
facilitating learning based on the data elicited from interconnected devices.
In conclusion, learning can no longer be understood by focusing solely on
cognition, development, or the behavior of individual learners; neither can it
be understood without reference to its situated, sociocultural and lifelong
nature, the tools through which learners construct meaning, and the context

in which these tools are used.

References

Bannan, B., Dabbagh, N., & Walcutt, J. J. (2019). Instructional strategies for the future.
In J. J. Walcutt and S. Schatz (Eds.), Modernizing learning: Building the future learning
ecosystem (pp. 223–242). Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office. License:
Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 4.0 IGO.


206 Empowering Learners to Engage

Bannan, B., *Torres, E. M., Purohit, H., *Pandey, R., & Cockroft, J. L. (2020). Sensor-
based adaptive instructional systems in live simulation training. In R. Sottilare and

J. Schwarz (Eds), Adaptive Instructional Systems. HCII 2020. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol 12214 (pp. 3–14). Cham: Springer. 10.1007/978-3-030-50788-6_1

Blaschke, L. M. (2012). Heutagogy and lifelong learning: A review of heutagogical
practice and self determined learning. The International Review of Research in Open and
Distributed Learning, 13(1), 56–71. 10.19173/irrodl.v13i1.1076

Blaschke, L. M. (2013). E-learning and self-determined learning skills. In S. Hase &

C. Kenyon (Eds.), Self determined learning: Heutagogy in action (pp. 55–68).
Bloomsbury Academic.

Brown, E. (2016, September 20). 21 Open Source Projects for IOT. Linux.com.
Retrieved December 22, 2022, from https://www.linux.com/NEWS/21-OPEN-
SOURCE-PROJECTS-IOT/

Carvalho, L., & Yeoman, P. (2019). Connecting the dots: Theorizing and mapping learning
entanglement  through  archaeology  and  design.  British  Journal  of  Educational
Technology. 10.1111/bjet.12761

Cigognini, M. E., Pettenati, M. C., & Edirisingha, P. (2011). Personal knowledge
management skills in Web 2.0-based learning. In M. J. W. Lee and C. McLoughlin
(Eds.), Web 2.0-based e-Learning: Applying social informatics for tertiary teaching
(pp. 109–127). IGI Global.

Computation Institute (2021). Array of things technology [YouTube Video]. Array of Things.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=166&v=pFL5QNwgs6A&feature=
emb_logo

Dabbagh, N. (2015). Personal Learning Environments (PLEs). In M. J. Spector (Ed.),
SAGE encyclopedia of educational technology (pp. 572–575). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.

Dabbagh, N., & Castaneda, L. (2020). Beyond personalization: The PLE as a framework
for lifelong learning. Educational Technology Research and Development, 68(6),
3041–3055. 10.1007/s11423-020-09831-z

Dabbagh, N., & Fake, H. (2017). College students’ perceptions of personal learning
environments through the lens of digital tools, processes and spaces. Journal of New
Approaches in Educational Research (NAER Journal), 6(1), 28–36.

Dabbagh, N., Fake, H., & Zhang, Z. (2019). Student perspectives of technology use for
learning in higher education. The Iberoamerican Review of Digital Education (RIED),
22(1), 127–152.

Dabbagh, N., & Kitsantas, A. (2012). Personal Learning Environments, social media, and
self-regulated learning: A natural formula for connecting formal and informal learning.
The Internet and Higher Education, 15(1), 3–8.

Dabbagh, N., & Kitsantas, A. (2013). The role of social media in self-regulated learning.
International Journal of Web Based Communities (IJWBC), Special Issue, Social
Networking and Education as a Catalyst Social Change, 9(2), 256–273.

Dabbagh, N., Kitsantas, A., Al-Freih, M., & Fake, H. (2015). Using social media to
develop Personal Learning Environments (PLEs) and self-regulated learning skills: A
case study. International Journal of Social Media and Interactive Learning Environments,
3(3), 163–183.

Dabbagh, N., & Kwende, M. (2021). Personal Learning Environments as digital spaces
that are collaborative, adaptive, and autonomous: College students’ perceptions of


Empowering Learners to Engage 207

Personal Learning Environments. Proceedings of the Technological Ecosystems for
Enhancing Multiculturality (TEEM ‘21) Conference. 10.1145/3486011.3486507

De Laat, M., & Dohn, N. B. (2019). Is networked learning postdigital education?

Postdigital Science and Education, 1(1), 17–20. 10.1007/s42438-019-00034-1
Decuypere, M., & Simons, M. (2016). Relational thinking in education: Topology,

sociomaterial studies, and figures. Pedagogy, Culture & Society, 24(3), 371–386. 10.
1080/14681366.2016.1166150

Downes, S. (2007). Models for sustainable open educational resources. Interdisciplinary
Journal of E-Learning and Learning Objects, 3(1), 29–44.

Downes, S. (2007). What Connectivism is. Half an Hour (weblog). https://halfanhour.
blogspot. com/2007/02/what-connectivism-is.html

Downes, S. (2022). Newer Theories for Digital Learning Spaces. In: Handbook of Open,
Distance and Digital Education. Singapore: Springer. 10.1007/978-981-19-0351-9_8-1
Drexler, W. (2010). The networked student model for construction of personal learning
environments: Balancing teacher control and student autonomy. Australasian Journal

of Educational Technology, 26(3), 369–385.

EDUCAUSE Learning Initiative (ELI) (2009). The seven things you should know about …
Personal Learning Environments. Retrieved from http://net.educause.edu.mutex.gmu.
edu/ir/library/pdf/ELI7049.pdf

Eudy, R. (2018). What is a learning ecosystem? and how does it support corporate
strategy? HSI. (n.d.). Retrieved December 22, 2022, from https://hsi.com/blog/what-
is-a-learning-ecosystem-and-how-does-it-support-corporate-strategy

Fake, H., & Dabbagh, N. (2021). The personalized learning interaction framework:
Expert perspectives on how to apply dimensions of personalized learning in workforce
training and development programs. Proceedings of the Technological Ecosystems for
Enhancing Multiculturality (TEEM ’21) Conference. 10.1145/3486011.3486503

Frauenberger, C. (2020). Entanglement HCI the next wave? ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction, 27(1), 1–27.

Fenwick, T., Edwards, R., & Sawchuk, P. (2011). Emerging approaches to educational
research: Tracing the sociomaterial (1st ed.). Abingdon: Routledge. Frauenberger, 2020
Gillis, A. S. (2022, March 4). What is IOT (internet of things) and how does it work? -
definition from techtarget.com. IoT Agenda. Retrieved December 22, 2022, from

https://www.techtarget.com/iotagenda/definition/Internet-of-Things-IoT

Goodyear, P. (2005). Educational design and networked learning: Patterns, pattern languages
and design practice. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 21(1), 82–101.

Hart, J. (2022). Top 100 Tools for Learning 2022 - Results of the 16th Annual Survey.
Top 100 Tools for Learning 2022. Retrieved December 22, 2022, from https://www.
toptools4learning.com/

Hendricks, D. A. (2015, August 10). The trouble with the internet of things – london
datastore. London Datastore News. Retrieved December 22, 2022, from https://data.
london.gov.uk/blog/the-trouble-with-the-internet-of-things/

ITU. (2022). Internet of things global standards initiative. Retrieved December 22, 2022,
from https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/gsi/iot/Pages/default.aspx

Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., Schor, J., Sefton-
Green, J., & Watkins, S. C. (2013). Connected learning: An agenda for research and
design. Irvine, California. Retrieved from http://dmlhub.net/sites/default/files/
ConnectedLearning_report.pdf


208 Empowering Learners to Engage

Jarche (2014) (this comes from here so I need help citing it) https://jarche.com/2014/02/
the-seek-sense-share-framework/

Kitsantas, A., & Dabbagh, N. (2010). Learning to learn with Integrative Learning
Technologies (ILT): A practical guide for academic success. Greenwich, CT:
Information Age Publishing.

Kop, R., & Fournier, H. (2014). Developing a framework for research on Personal
Learning Environments. E-learning in Europe Journal, 35, 13–17.

Kurzweil, D., & Baker, S. (2016). The internet of things for educators and learners. Educause.
https://er.educause.edu/articles/2016/8/the-internet-of-things-for-educators-and-learners

Malafouris, L., & Renfrew, C. (2010). The cognitive life of things: Recasting the boundaries
of the mind. Cambridge: McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research.

Mattar, J. (2018). Constructivism and connectivism in education technology: Active,
situated, authentic, experiential, and anchored learning. RIED. Revista Iberoamericana
de Educación a Distancia, 21(2), 201–217. doi: 10.5944/ried.21.2.20055

Rahimi, E., van den Berg, J., & Veen, W. (2015). Facilitating student-driven constructing
of learning environments using Web 2.0 personal learning environments. Computers &
Education, 81, 235–246. 10.1016/j.compedu.2014.10.012

Shafiq, M., Gu, Z., Cheikhrouhou, O., Alhakami, W., & Hamam, H. (2022). The rise of
“internet of things”: Review and open research issues related to detection and pre-
vention  of  IOT-based  security  attacks.  Wireless  Communications  and  Mobile
Computing, 2022, 1–12. 10.1155/2022/8669348

Siemens, G. (2005). Connectivism: A learning theory for the digital age. International
Journal of Instructional Technology and Distance Learning, 2(1). Available from http://
www.itdl.org/Journal/Jan_05/article01.htm

Taraghi, B. (2012). Ubiquitous personal learning environment (UPLE). International
Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning, 7(2), 7–14.

Torres-Kompen, R., Edirisingha, P., Canaleta, X., Alsina, M., & Monguet, J. M. (2019).
Personal learning environments based on Web 2.0 services in higher education.
Telematics and Informatics, 38, 194–206.

Tu, C. H., Sujo-Montes, L., Yen, C. J., Chan, J. Y., & Blocher, M. (2012). The inte-
gration of personal learning environments and open network learning environments.
TechTrends, 56(3), 13–19. 10.1007/s11528-012-0571-7

U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Technology (2017). Reimagining
the role of technology in higher education: A supplement to the national education tech-
nology plan. Washington, D.C., 2017.

Walcutt, J. J., & Schatz, S. (2019). Modernizing learning. In J. J. Walcutt and S. Schatz
(Eds.), Modernizing learning: Building the future learning ecosystem (pp. 223–242).
Washington, DC: Government Publishing Office. License: Creative Commons
Attribution CC BY 4.0 IGO.

Zimmerman, B. J. (2000). Attainment of self-regulation: A social cognitive perspective. In

M. Boekaerts, P. Pintrich, and M. Zeidner (Eds.), Self-regulation: Theory, research, and
applications (pp. 13–39). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.


Index

Note: Bold page numbers refer to tables and italic page numbers refer to figures.


ADL see Advanced Distributed Learning
Advanced Distributed Learning 36

AGI see Artificial General Intelligence
AGU see American Geophysical Union’s
AI coaches 129–130, 135–138

AIR see American Institute of Research
American Geophysical Union’s 150
American Institute of Research 18
American Psychological Association 18
andragogy 54–55

ANI see Artificially Narrow Intelligence
APA see American Psychological

Association

appreciative inquiry 140–141

articulation 157

Artificial General Intelligence 137
Artificially Narrow Intelligence 137
Association for Talent and

Development 173

asynchronous instructional delivery 78

ATD see Association for Talent and
Development

augmented reality (AR) experiences 10

backwards design 80, 80

basic interaction/sharing 152

behaviorally defined data 94, 170

better together 134

bichronous instructional delivery 79

blended approach 20

blended personalized learning 33; in higher
education 35–36; in K-12 contexts
33–35; research on 33; in workforce
training and development 36–39

C4LPT see Centre for Learning &
Performance Technologies

CAI see Computer Assisted Instruction
California State University, Los Angeles 83
CBI see Computer-Based Instruction
CCK08 see Connectivism and Connective

Knowledge

CDOL see Center for Distance and Online
Learning

Center for Distance and Online
Learning 83

Centre for Learning & Performance
Technologies 197

Chief Learning Officer 110
Circumstances, Thoughts, Feelings,

Action, and Results 134
CLO see Chief Learning Officer

COACHE see Collaborative on Academic
Careers in Higher Education

coaching 129

coaching programs, design 130–133
collaboration and social negotiation 157
collaborative brainstorming see Design

thinking

collaborative learning 108


210 Index


Collaborative on Academic Careers in
Higher Education 122

collective reflective assessment 172,
174–175

Communities of Practice 123, 147–151
Computer Assisted Instruction 5
computer-automated learner-to-learner

interaction 94

Computer-Based Instruction 8
Connectivism and Connective

Knowledge 163

content creation and delivery 69–71
content delivery 69–71; technology of

67–69

contextually defined data 94, 170

cooperative learning 108

COP see Communities of Practice
CPS see creative problem solving
creative problem solving 115

CTFAR see Circumstances, Thoughts,
Feelings, Action, and Results

Cyrano.ai 141

Dalton Plan, structural pillars 2
DBR see design-based research
Delphi Method 44–46

Denver Public Schools 30
Design Thinking 114–117

Design-based research 202

Dewey, John 1–2

DFM see Distinguished Faculty Mentors
dialogic instructional strategies 156
Distinguished Faculty Mentors 124
Donut 103

DPS see Denver Public Schools
DT see Design Thinking

e-coaching 130; programs of 133–135
EDU see education

education 197

EDUCAUSE 146

engagement 137

entangled pedagogy 12

ethics 137

E-Time 28

external objective assessment 172, 176

Faculty Mentoring Communities 122, 123

fairness 137

FMC see Faculty Mentoring Communities
folksonomies 146

Game-Based Learning 76

GBL see Game-Based Learning
George Mason University 122
GMU see George Mason University
GROW model 131

iCivics 82, 82

IEEE see Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers

immersive learning environments: games as
76; simulations and virtual reality as 75

immersive learning, technology 71–75
individual reflective assessment 172, 173
Information Communication

Technologies 9, 29

Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers 150

instructional delivery modality 77
Instructional Systems Designers 49
intelligent machines 3–5

internal objective assessment 172,
175–176

Internet of things 205
IoT see Internet of things

ISD see Instructional Systems Designers
Jigsaw method 117

knowledge-building communities 123

LACOE see Los Angeles County Office of
Education

LEAP Innovations 34

learner agency 13–14
learner defined data 170

learner to community of practice 52–53
learner to content interaction 50

learner-based approach 20

learner-based personalization 7, 20, 26–27,

30, 32, 187–194, 188, 197; research on

26–27

learner-based personalized learning 26; in
higher education contexts 29–30; in K-
12 contexts 27; workforce training and

development contexts 30–33
learner-centered teaching strategies 1

learner-content interaction 47, 60; use case

of 82–83

learner-defined data 94

learner-learner interaction 47, 87; design

of 90


Index 211


learner-small group interaction 106,
106–108; design 111–114

learner-social network interaction 194;
coaching and mentoring 156;
communities of practices 148–151,
154; COP interaction 145; designing

of 154–158, 157; massive open online

courses 163–166; network effect 146;
overview 145–147; personal learning
environment 151, 154; personal

learning networks 151–154;

technologies 158–163, 159–161, 162,

164, 165

learner-teacher instructor 47

learner-to-Internet of Things interaction
204–205

learner-to-learner interaction 50–51;
categories of peer learning 95–97

learning ecosystem 198–199
Learning Experience Designers 49

Learning Management System 31, 38, 62,

69, 83, 119, 189

Learning Record Store 203

LED see Learning Experience Designers
LMS see Learning Management System
Los Angeles County Office of

Education 83

LRS see Learning Record Store
lunch and learn 121

Massive Open Online Communities/
Courses 10, 91, 163–166, 164, 165

means of expression 133
mental contrasting 132

mentoring 129

mobile learning 10

MOOCs see Massive Open Online
Communities/Courses

multiagent socio-technical systems 204
multimedia design principle 62–66
multimedia learning 61

National Center for Faculty Development
and Diversity 124

NCFDD see National Center for Faculty
Development and Diversity

new faculty members 122
NFM see new faculty members

O’Connor, Sandra Day 82

OER see Open Educational Resources

Office of Information Technology 100
OIT see Office of Information Technology
OLPC see One Laptop Per Child

One Laptop Per Child 17

Open Educational Resources 163, 200

OSCAR 132

Parkhurst, Helen 2, 3

PBL see Problem-Based Learning

peer collaboration 95, 109–110, 117–118,

124–125

peer facilitation 95, 110–111, 120–122, 125

peer feedback 95

peer interaction 95

peer learning 88–89

peer response 95, 110, 118–120, 125

peer tutoring 88

peer-to-peer learning 88

performance data 170

performance data 94

PERLS see Pervasive Learning System
personal information management

151, 191

Personal Knowledge Management 190
Personal Knowledge Mastery

152–153, 153

personal learning 197

Personal Learning Environment Manager

see PLEM

Personal Learning Environment 10, 27,

30, 31, 151, 195–198

Personal Learning Networks 147,
151–154, 166, 190

Personal Professional Learning Plan 30
Personalized Learning 1, 17, 18;

continuum of 5–7, 6; efforts 17–19;
intelligent machines and 3–5; learner-
centered teaching strategies 1–3; role/
influence of technology 7–13

personalized learning designs: assessing
tools 178, 179–180; assessment,
measuring effectiveness 172; collective
reflective assessment 172, 174–175;
data sources 170–171; evaluating ROI
178–182; evaluating strategies
169–170; external objective assessment
172, 176; individual reflective

assessment 172, 173; internal objective

assessment 172, 175–176; multiple

forms 176–178, 177; organizational

PLiF offerings 182–184, 183


212 Index


Personalized Learning Interaction
Framework 46–50, 48, 61, 147, 186,

187; dimensions of 194, 203–205;
implementing PLE 201–203; learner-
based personalization 187–194, 188;

PLE ecosystem 198–201, 200; research

on 195–198

Pervasive Learning System 36
PKM see Personal Knowledge

Management

PKM see Personal Knowledge Mastery
PLATO Project, the 4–5

PLE see Personal Learning Environment
PLEM 27

PLiF see Personalized Learning Interaction
Framework

PLNs see Personal Learning Networks
PPL see personal learning

PPLP see Personal Professional Learning
Plan

pre-internet technology 8

Pressey, Sidney L. 3

Problem-Based Learning 109, 121
programming tutoring system 23

protus see programming tutoring system
proximity 133

reflection 158

relationship driven data 94, 170

reliability 137

Return on Investment 178–182
ROI see Return on Investment
rotated selection 94

SAMHSA see Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration

scaffolded social learning 155

scaffolding framework 191, 192–193, 194

SDL see Self-Directed Learning

Self Regulated Learning 190–191, 195–198

Self-Directed Learning 31

Self-Regulated Learning 30

self-selection 93

semantic 11

SHRM see Society of Human Resource
Management

social affordances/attributes 146

social learning 147

social media 146

social networking 152

social software 146

social web 9, 146

Society of Human Resource
Management 174

SRL see Self Regulated Learning
Substance Abuse and Mental Health

Services Administration 83
supportive instructional strategies 155
synchronous instructional delivery 77
systems-based approach 20

systems-based personalization 20; in higher
education 23–24; in K-12 21–23;
research on systems 20–21; workforce
training and development programs
25–26

systems-based personalization 7, 20–23

TEE see Thriving Earth Exchange
Thriving Earth Exchange 150
time  133

“train the trainer” model 140–141

vCOPs see virtual Communities of Practice
virtual Communities of Practice 147
Virtual Learning Environment 151
visibility 133

VLE see Virtual Learning Environment

Web 1.0 Technologies 9

Web 2.0 Technologies 10, 11, 146

Web 3.0 technologies 11

workplace learning 197
WPL see workplace learning

